Mr. Laurin (Canada): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting. We thank
Mr. Guehenno for addressing this open debate today,
and welcome the commitments he personally made this
morning. We also thank the United States presidency
for creating an opportunity to hear directly from a
senior gender adviser about her work in the field.
Ms. Smythe's experience in this area is critical to
bridging the gap between policy and implementation.
We commend her for her work.

Canada strongly and actively supports full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
welcome the efforts of the United Nations to integrate
the resolution into its day-to-day operations. While we

join other speakers in recognizing the progress that has
been made, we cannot forget that there is a vast amount
of work left to be done.

We welcome the United Nations coordinating
efforts undertaken through the Inter-Agency Taskforce
on Women, Peace and Security. We are particularly
heartened by efforts of the Department for
Disarmament Affairs (DDA) and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), in
partnership with the Office of Human Resources
Management (OHRM), to develop detailed gender
action plans, which we believe will lead to more
effective and representative programming and policy
by these bodies.

We welcome the recent establishment of a gender
adviser position in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, and look forward to the assessment
announced by Mr. Guehenno this morning. We would
be interested in Mr. Guehenno's views on the prospect
of the Department's undertaking an initiative similar to
that of DDA and OCHA to facilitate a better
integration of gender considerations in the activities of
the Department.

We strongly support initiatives related to training
peacekeepers on the importance of integrating a gender
perspective in their work. In that respect, we would be
interested in further information from Mr. Guehenno on
efforts to ensure that gender perspectives are
mainstreamed in all training modules and are not
confined to gender-specific training modules. We
believe this will contribute significantly to tackling this
issue.

Canada warmly welcomes the issuance by the
Secretary-General last week of the bulletin on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse. This document has been much anticipated and
provides an important accountability framework for the
United Nations system, as well as for Member States,
complementing the important work undertaken by the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee Task Force on this
issue. Putting in place mechanisms for monitoring and
follow-up are essential next steps for preventing such
incidents and effectively addressing them, should they
occur.

We were pleased that, in response to last year's
Office of Internal Oversight Services report on sexual
exploitation, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General instituted a Personal Conduct
Committee to look into cases of misconduct, including
sexual exploitation, involving civilian and military
personnel of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone. We welcome Mr. Guehenno's commitment to
setting up similar mechanisms in all missions.

We would be interested in being informed by
Mr. Guehenno on the follow-up action taken by the
Secretariat to convene the meeting requested by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to
discuss ways and means of meeting challenges in the
areas of conduct and discipline.

(spoke in French)

We again call for explicit reference to gender
considerations in all Security Council mandates. The
lack of information in the reports to the Security
Council, noted this morning, should not be an excuse
for inaction. Council members can seek information
from the Secretariat and take advantage of the presence
of Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in
the Council to hold them accountable and ask them for
information on the situation of women and girls and on
ways of enhancing the protection of civilians. We
would like to know what difficulties Ms. Smythe
encountered in ensuring that information finds its way
to the Council.

With regard to the Council's recent missions to
West Africa and the Great Lakes region, we, like other
speakers, are disheartened that their reports are silent
on gender equality issues and give no indication of
whether meetings were held with women or with
ministries and organizations dealing with gender. Such
missions should systematically include this item in
their mandates. They should address it explicitly in
their reports and make specific recommendations on
the situation of women and girls. We welcome
Germany's commitment in this connection with regard
to the Council's mission in Afghanistan.

We must again call attention to the absolute need
for the system and us, the Member States, to achieve
gender balance in the system. In 1995, in Beijing, we
set the goal of 50/50 gender distribution in the United
Nations system by 2000. In the context of today's
meeting, resolution 1325 (2000) urges the Secretary-
General and Member States to improve gender balance.
Yet, at the level of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, there is still only one woman
leading peacekeeping operations, out of approximately
50 such positions. We must recommit ourselves to
achieving this 50/50 gender balance goal. Moreover, as
Mr. Guehenno noted, we must remember that it is our
role, as Member States, to put forward candidates.

Canada continues to actively implement its
commitments made at the time of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). We are pleased to be working
with the Division for the Advancement of Women in
organizing the upcoming Expert Group Meeting on
"Peace agreements as a means for promoting gender
equality and ensuring participation of women", to be
held in Ottawa next month. We call on all States to
fulfil their commitments and to work to make this
resolution a reality for women in order to ensure their
protection and to give them the opportunity to
participate in rebuilding their communities.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for providing a
forum for this important debate.

