Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): Two
years ago we adopted resolution 1325 (2000). As Jean-
Marie Guehenno, Angela King and Noeleen Heyzer
mentioned, its implementation is not entirely
satisfactory. Some progress has been made, but the
situation of women and children has not really
improved. They still constitute the majority of civilian
victims of armed conflict. They are still the largest
group among displaced persons and refugees, and the
impact of conflict on women - for example, in the
transmission of AIDS - is still very serious. We await
the report of the Secretary-General, about which Ms.
King and Ms. Heyzer have already told us something.

However, there are some encouraging
developments, as mentioned by the Cameroon
delegation. For example, the Rome Treaty of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) recognizes that rape
and other forms of sexual abuse of women are covered
by the ICC and are regarded as war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

Another encouraging development is the creation
of posts for advisors on gender-specific issues in six
United Nations missions, in Afghanistan, Bosnia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kosovo, East
Timor and Sierra Leone. This is an improvement, but
we must note that resolution 1325 (2000) has so far
been implemented only very weakly. That is why
today's debate is so important, so that both members
and non-members of the Security Council can make
their contributions as to how to better implement the
resolution and offer input to the Task Force report
under preparation, as discussed by Ms. King.

I have a few questions. Several delegations,
including the Ambassador of Norway, spoke of the
need in DPKO to establish a specific post for gender
issues. I believe there were some problems in the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions (ACABQ) in that connection. Of course I
know the Security Council should not get involved in
ACABQ matters, but it might be useful for that
Committee to reconsider the matter so that a post for a
counsellor on gender issues can be set up in DPKO.

I have a question for Ms. King and Ms. Heyzer. A
lot has been said about the role of women in peace
processes and in the reconstruction of States after
conflicts. The Mano River Union Women's Peace
Network has been mentioned often. Ms. King spoke of
experiences in Burundi and Somalia in that connection.
Afghan women are becoming increasingly involved as
well. Mr. Brahimi and Mr. Karzai spoke of the Loya
Jirga, of what part women would play in that process. I
ask Ms. King what her Division and the Secretariat can
do to help women who want to take initiatives in
peace-building and ending conflicts in their countries.

Finally, Ms. Heyzer spoke of anther study to be
prepared by independent experts on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). While this is a good idea, I
wondered how that study would fit in with the report of
the Task Force described by Ms. King and others.

One last word. France joins the Latin American
club of countries with female ministers of defense. I
allow myself to say this, because it was mentioned by
Chile and Colombia.

