Mr. Morejon (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Over
the past 60 years, the United Nations has played a
central role in combating all forms of discrimination
and violence against women. It has also made a
contribution to redoubling efforts to promote gender
equality, and in particular to the establishment of an
internationally agreed normative framework that
provides guidance for the efforts of Governments and
other stakeholders. In following up those efforts,
Ecuador has ratified every relevant international treaty.
We have also sponsored various General Assembly
resolutions on this issue.

The Security Council's adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) marked a milestone in acknowledging the
importance of mainstreaming the gender perspective at
all stages of a peace process. That resolution also
reflected the Council's interest in the situation of boys
and girls in armed conflict, the protection of civilians
and the prevention of conflict.

Ecuador has taken due note of the first report
(S/2009/362) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008), which refers
to various efforts by States to eradicate this evil.
Despite the significant efforts led by the Secretary-
General and the Security Council, Ecuador believes
that it is urgent to achieve greater cooperation among
the principal organs of the United Nations, bearing in
mind that the General Assembly is the universal body
charged with providing a normative framework to
guide the decisions of all States.

Ecuador believes that all Member States, as well
as the United Nations system, should more coherently
and systematically apply international law and
implement the programmes and policies aimed at
combating ongoing complex problems hindering the
achievement of the rights of women. Since 2008, my
country has had a new constitutional framework that
lays the foundations for participatory democracy. The
preamble of our Constitution also acknowledges the
rights of women and provides for a way to move from
equality on paper to genuine equality by identifying
how those who have been victims of inequality and
discrimination due to tradition, history, culture or
religious attitudes are to be treated.

In conclusion, allow me to emphasize that, in an
effort to ensure equality between men and women,
Ecuador is working to identify the most appropriate
way of setting up a national gender equality council.

The challenges are numerous. But there is a
reality that must be changed. Allow me, therefore, to
reiterate the decision of the Government and the people
of Ecuador to continue to cooperate with the
international community to ensure the right of women
to lives free from violence and to guarantee their full
participation in mediation and negotiation processes,
all aspects of peacekeeping operations, the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and the post-conflict
reconstruction process.

