Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): We are very
grateful for this opportunity to discuss the Secretary-
General's reports on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and on women's
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466). I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission for their briefings today.

Over two and a half years have passed since the
first peacebuilding report (S/2009/304) was
commissioned. That report was commissioned as a
result of concerns about the support provided by the
international community - including, in particular, the
United Nations - to countries emerging from conflict.
Many of the issues that it identified were not new, but
the process gave fresh impetus to the effort to resolve
the familiar problems of fragmentation, weak
leadership, lack of strategy and sluggish deployment of
civilian experts and finance. The same is true for the
women and peacebuilding report. Many of the issues in
this good report are also not new. The problem has
been one of delivery, not ignorance of the issues.

We have made progress over the past two years,
but not enough. What we now need over the next two
years is a shift from reflection and debate in New York
to roll-out and implementation on the ground. And to
do that, we propose a five-point course of action.

First, we need to wrap up outstanding
programmes of reform. These include finalizing the
civilian capacity review, clarifying roles and
responsibilities, and putting in place new and creative
ways to enhance the relationship between the United
Nations and the World Bank.

Secondly, we should learn lessons about what
works from those reforms that have already been
completed, notably on leadership, integrated planning
and finance. We must ensure that those lessons are
systematically fed into the planning and
implementation of other missions. Here, I would like to
highlight the example of Sierra Leone, where good
5
leadership and integration of effort have led to a real
step-change in United Nations support to the country.

Thirdly, we need to focus on issues where there
are persistent bottlenecks to sustainable peacebuilding.
The United Nations system, working Closely and more
effectively with other international partners, should get
better at helping a country unblock those bottlenecks.
We have seen time and again that a lack of progress in
a number of key areas - including, in particular,
security sector reform and strengthening the rule of
law, restoring other core government functions and
revitalizing the economy - can hold back progress
and risk a return to conflict.

Fourthly, we need to see real progress on the
ground in priority countries. For example, in Liberia
we want to see the transition of the United Nations
presence shortly after the elections. We see the
Peacebuilding Commission, following its very helpful
recent review, as having a critical role in preparing for
this by helping to extend and boost police capacity so
that the United Nations can hand over responsibility
for safety and security to the national authorities.

Another example is the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. This Council sent a strong signal earlier
this year in turning the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo into
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The focus
should increasingly be on stabilization, with
peacebuilding going hand in hand with robust
peacekeeping. We cannot successfully address the root
causes of the violence and insecurity that prevail in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without reforming
the police and the army and without real improvements
in the capability of the country's justice sector.

Fifthly and finally, post-conflict peacebuilding
cannot be truly successful without ensuring that
women are an equal part of the process. They need to
be routinely involved in conflict resolution, post-
conflict peacebuilding and governance in order to
achieve sustainable peace. In this, the tenth anniversary
year of resolution 1325 (2000), we welcome the
Secretary-General's report on women's participation in
peacebuilding as an important step in that direction.
The challenges to effective women's participation in
peacebuilding are significant, but this is all the more
reasons for unity of effort. The Secretary-General's
report sets out a clear direction for the United Nations

system, the international community and conflict-
affected States to deliver a practical difference to
women's involvement on the ground. We consider that
the newly established United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women will have an
important role in driving this forward.

