Mr. Arriola Ramirez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the delegation ofthe Republic of
Paraguay, I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/250) on conflict-related sexual violence. We
welcome the initiative of the Peruvian presidency of the
Security Council to convene this debate.

Paraguay has participated in United Nations
peacekeeping activities since 1965. Since then, it has
gradually introduced women into military contingents
and the police force, who contribute to the security
and preservation of international peace. In that regard,
since 2006, my country has seen female career officers
graduate from its Military Academy. Currently,
Paraguay contributes more than 100 military and police
personnel to six United Nations peacekeeping missions.

Based on that experience, my delegation highlights
the value of specialized training for peacekeeping
missions contingents, both before and after deployment,
on the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence,
the care of victims and the resources available for
the prosecution and trial of those responsible, while
always respecting the sovereignty of States, the
principle of non-intervention in internal affairs, and
international law. Paraguayan military personnel receive
general training on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict prior to their deployment in peacekeeping
missions, as well as specific and specialized training on
civil-military coordination and on violence and gender
inequality, at the Training Centre for Peacekeeping
Operations in Paraguay.

Based on Paraguayan participation, another area
that we believe should be reinforced is the clear inclusion
by the Security Council of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. The mandate of protection of civilians
against sexual violence, in its broadest sense, must be
explicit and treated as a priority in situations where,
due to the nature of the conflict, civilians are at a high
risk of suffering that type of violence. Those mandates
must incorporate both prevention mechanisms and
protocols to assist victims and ensure accountability
of the perpetrators. To that end, the existing mandates
of peacekeeping missions should also be updated
and adapted.

Finally, and from a broader perspective, the
Paraguayan delegation highlights the need to frame
initiatives addressing sexual violence in conflict
situations within efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, particularly Goal 5, on gender equality
and the empowerment of all women and girls. A
holistic, effective and lasting response to the scourge of
sexual violence in conflict will not be possible as long
as there is an inequality gap between women and men,
discrimination and the economic and social exclusion
of women and girls in every part of the world.

