Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening and presiding over today's momentous open
debate and for Spain's leadership in the women and
peace and security agenda. My delegation wishes to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his remarks,
and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women for her in-depth and insightful briefing.
The voices of civil society are intrinsic to the
women and peace and security agenda, and I therefore
warmly recognize Ms. Julienne Lusenge, Ms. Yanar
Mohammed and Ms. Alaa Murabit for sharing their
experiences and views.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

The adoption ofresolution 1325 (2000) sparked a sea
of change in the way we viewed women's involvement
in pursuit of peace and security. Fifteen years and seven
resolutions later, our belief in the integral role of women
in ending and preventing conflict remains unchanged.
However, results on the ground leave much to be
desired. In commemorating the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), this meeting
presents a golden opportunity to make tangible progress
in ensuring the protection, participation, representation
and empowerment of women and girls in situations of
conflict.

In addition, the convergence of the three high-
level reviews on women and peace and security, peace
operations and peacebuilding provides rich sources
for our continued discussion and action. We take this
opportunity to thank the lead author, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, members of the high-level advisory
grooup and UN-Women for their work on the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We believe that the research and recommendations
therein merit full examination and consideration by
Member States, the United Nations and all the relevant
stakeholders.

We must acknowledge our collective ownership
over the women and peace and security agenda in
order to realize the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Every stakeholder * Member States, the
United Nations, regional organizations, civil society
and the individual - can play a role.

We commend the Secretary-General for his
renewed initiatives to promote greater representation of
women in United Nations senior leadership, mediation
teams and peacekeeping missions, as well as to promote
better coordination among United Nations entities
in mainstreaming the issue of women and peace and
security.

In implementing this agenda in the immediate
and short term, Malaysia intends to focus on capacity-
building in the areas of protection and conflict
prevention. United Nations Blue Helmets undertake
a crucial aspect of protection efforts in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We also fully support the
implementation of mandatory predeployment training
for peacekeepers on preventing sexual violence,
exploitation and abuse.

In order to further the women and peace and
security agenda, I am pleased to announce that Malaysia
commits to continuing capacity-building training for
peacekeepers, including on the protection of civilians,
gender and cultural diversity, through the Malaysian
Peacekeeping Centre.

With regard to post-conflict peacekeeping,
Malaysia is presently undertaking efforts to offer
relevant technical assistance and cooperation to women
from countries in transition and that are newly emerging
from conflict, under the auspices of the Malaysian
technical cooperation programme. These commitments
will be reviewed from time to time and will be adjusted
accordingly, taking into account the relevant needs and
requirements of both recipients and donors.

Resolution 2242 (2015) marks an important
milestone in the advancement of the women and peace
and security agenda. It signifies the commitment of
the Security Council to strengthen the integration of
women and peace and security concerns across its body
of work through innovative approaches and enhanced
information sharing.

I thank the delegations of Spain and the United
Kingdom for leading this important initiative, while
emphasizing the necessity to build trust and inclusive
cooperation within the Council in support of this
agenda.

Our task for the next 15 years is to ensure that
every woman can succeed, especially women and girls
in conflict and post-conflict situations, and not only
stand in the shadows of men. In that regard, I assure
you, Mr. President, of Malaysia's steadfast commitment
to this outcome both within the Council and beyond.

