Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): Paraguay expresses its deep sadness and
heartfelt condolences to the people and the Government
of the Russian Federation in connection with the
assassination of Ambassador Andrey Karlov in Ankara,
and to the people and the Government of Germany for
the attack perpetrated in Berlin. We hope that such
terrible acts will not happen again.

We express our gratitude for the Secretary-General's
report (S/2016/949). We welcome the initiative of the
Spanish presidency to convene this open debate on
trafficking in persons in conflict situations. We believe
that this open debate will make it possible to become
familiar with the opinions of Member States, as well
as to try to determine the nexus between that scourge
and violent extremism. That information will allow the
Organization to design policies to confront those issues
in an appropriate and effective way.
The Security Council, as well as all States Members
of the Organization, must contribute to establishing
an effective system for the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts. That system must also take into
account mechanisms for dealing with and combating
the trafficking in persons and sexual violence in its
broadest sense, as well as violent extremism in relation
to situations of armed conflict.

We believe that the Security Council must include,
in a clear and explicit way, the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. In situations in which, owing to the
nature of the conflict, those scourges pose significant
threats, the mandates must incorporate both preventive
mechanisms and protocols to take care of the victims
and to ensure the surrender and accountability of
the perpetrators.

It is crucial to recall that such violent deeds are
exacerbated by restrictive and exclusionary migratory
policies, which not only increase the vulnerability of
victims but also prevent their identification and access
to the medical and psychological services required.
In that respect, Paraguay emphasizes the value of
the appropriate education and training of contingents
in peacekeeping operations, before and after their
deployment, on aspects of preventing and combating
such problems, as well as on the care for the victims
of those crimes. It is critical to prevent the double
stigmatization of the victims.

We must collaborate on the system for preventing
and combating those scourges. At the same time, we
need to provide care for the victims and to ensure
the prosecution of those responsible, in a coordinated
fashion and with full respect for States' sovereignty and
for the principle of non-intervention in domestic affairs
and in accordance with international law. Paraguay
understands that it is also necessary to address the
trafficking in persons in conflict situations within the
framework of the General Assembly and in connection
with the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
specifically Goals 5.2, 8.7 and 16.2.

Finally, my country believes that Member States and
the United Nations system must cooperate with States
in conflict and post-conflict situations so as to reinforce
their institutional capacities to effectively confront the
challenges involved in combating such scourges.

