Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, I would like to
commend the French presidency for organizing this
debate as we approach the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Zainab Bangura, Maria Grazia Giammarinaro and Lisa
Davis for their briefings.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union and wishes to
add the following remarks in its national capacity.

After the adoption of resolution 2253 (2015)
condemning the abduction of women and children for
sexual exploitation and trafficking and of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/15 in December 2015, Italy
welcomes the consolidated involvement of the Council
on the issue of human trafficking and looks forward
to reading the Secretary-General's report on progress
in better implementing existing mechanisms to counter
trafficking in persons. The United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, as well as the expertise
of specialized agencies such as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, represent a very solid basis
for the upcoming report and its follow-up mechanism.

The relevance of today's debate is that it links this
emerging issue with the consolidated set of resolutions
on women, peace and security and sexual violence
in conflict. These include resolution 1325 (2000),
adopted during Namibia's Council presidency in 2000,
recognizing that peace is inextricably linked with
gender equality and women's leadership; resolution
1820 (2008), on sexual violence in armed conflicts,
adopted during Italy's last term on the Council and with
our active involvement in the negotiations to ensure
that the connection between international security and
sexual violence be finally recognized; and resolution
2242 (2015), promoted by Spain last December, on the
gender dimensions of violent extremism.

This link is extremely relevant today. It is recent
news that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham uses
social media to buy or sell sex slaves, as well as as a
means of funding itself. Mass migration flows - a
phenomenon that Italy has been witnessing for a long
time - continue to include conflict-related sexual
violence as a deliberate form of persecution to displace
populations, with thousands of new refugees and
migrants fleeing their homeland. Italy's response to
this very complex issue is multifaceted.

First, we promote an holistic approach. To this
end, we have put forward a migration compact, based
on a strong, unwavering commitment to humanitarian
principles - first and foremost saving lives at sea - and
on concrete and achievable goals to address the root
causes of migration, while at the same time disrupting
the business model of traffickers.

Secondly, we strengthen the justice response by
ratifying and implementing relevant instruments to
combat human trafficking and protect the victims.
Among them, let me mention the Palermo Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Additional Protocols, including those on the trafficking
ofmigrants and the slave trade. In this regard, I also wish
to underscore the action of relevant Italian authorities
in arresting, investigating and prosecuting individuals
responsible for the crime of trafficking.

Thirdly, we tailor training for peacekeeping
operations. Italy hosts the Centre of Excellence for
Stability Police Units in Vicenza, which since 2005 has
organized training courses for specialized police units,
including courses on the protection and promotion
of human rights and international humanitarian
law and on sexual and gender-based violence. The
trained personnel- over 8,000 so far, mainly from
Africa - join the formed police units to be deployed
in United Nations peace missions or missions led by
regional or subregional organizations.

Fourthly, we are actively engaged in international
initiatives, such as the Preventing Sexual Violence in
Conflict initiative, launched at the 2013 meeting of the
Group of Seven by the United Kingdom.

Given the alarming figures on the use of sexual
violence by terrorists and extremist groups, much
remains to be done. I wish very briefly to make two
points as food for thought.

First, we need to help victims of conflict-related
sexual violence to come forward and report, because
the statistics show that we have are far from being
exhaustive. Practitioners in the field estimate that
for each rape reported in connection with a conflict,
10 to 20 cases likely go undocumented. In this regard,
programmes of economic empowerment specifically
addressed to the victims should be explored.
Secondly, we need to strengthen the specific aspect
of mediation in the women and peace and security
agenda. We believe that this aspect has yet to be fully
exploited in all its potential. In line with our strong
belief that we need to mainstream mediation in all
United Nations agendas, we intend to do so by working
together with UN-Women.

In conclusion, these recommendations cannot
be decoupled from specific efforts to protect and
empower women and girls. Only empowered women
can contribute more effectively to sustainable peace
and security and act as a preventive force to eliminate
sexual violence in conflict and related trafficking. Italy
remains committed to achieving the goal of empowering
women and girls.

