Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
trafficking in persons in conflict situations, with a focus
on forced labour, slavery and other similar practices.

About a year ago, the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, addressed the Council
and said that

"trafficking in persons in conflict and crisis
situations is not a mere possibility or isolated
incident; rather, it happens on a regular basis as a
consequence of conflict" (S/PV. 7704, p. 6).

It must therefore be seen and addressed as a systemic
outcome of conflict. Conflict-related trafficking
is, however, rarely detected, and even less often
addressed. That observation is shared by our Philippine
inter-agency council against trafficking, which
acknowledges the existence of trafficking in persons
incidents in conflict areas in the Philippines, but faces
the difficulty of tracking those incidents.

The Philippines has adopted a one-country team
and multistakeholder approach to trafficking in persons
that consolidates the mandates, efforts, resources
and interests of the duty-bearers and stakeholders
to come up with a robust response. That has resulted
in promoting awareness and the mainstreaming of
interventions, down to the grass-roots level. Realizing
the increased vulnerability of populations in conflict
areas, the Government has activated a structure
called the gender-based violence cluster, composed
mainly of law enforcers and social welfare service
providers who specialize in gender issues, and civil
society representatives. The cluster is tasked to
address the needs of women and children in conflict
situations, especially in mitigating vulnerabilities to
sexual violence and trafficking. The cluster develops
and implements programmes for access to protective
information, psychosocial and trauma-informed
care, protective custody and access to education and
economic opportunities.

The issue of child soldiers, especially young men
and boys, is also of serious concern to the Philippine
Government. The Government considers the recruitment
and use ofchildren as soldiers as a grave case ofviolation
of child rights. In that regard, our efforts are focused on
preventing their recruitment, investigating allegations
of recruitment, holding the perpetrators accountable
and training front-line officers in appropriate methods
to assist children rescued from armed groups.

To address the problem of human trafficking as
a means to finance the activities of terrorists, armed
groups and transnational organized crime networks, it
is important to examine trafficking corridors and the
business flow of trafficking. That approach has enabled
the Philippines to strategically locate victims and
traffickers in the entire process, especially at critical
points of intervention where victims are the most visible
and can be rescued. It also allows the identification of
critical points in the business flow to deal the strongest
blow to the operations of trafficking syndicates and
to expose and develop strategies to arrest new means
employed by traffickers.

The Philippine Government has made it a priority
to provide our migrant workers with protection from
human trafficking and exploitation. That protection
is provided through national laws, international
arrangements, cooperation with destination countries
and initiatives in multilateral forums. Recently, we
have worked with the United States, the International
Organization for Migration and other partners on the
Migrants in Countries in Crisis initiative to improve
responses to assist migrants in countries experiencing
conflict or natural disaster. The guidelines, principles
and practices leverage the competencies and strengths
of various stakeholders to save lives, increase protection
and decrease the vulnerabilities of migrants, including
from trafficking. The global compact for safe, orderly
and regular migration also provides us with an
opportunity to strengthen international cooperation
to allow migrants to move across borders safely and
prevent them from falling into the arms of traffickers.

The very nature ofhuman trafficking requires cross-
border cooperation. Member States need to strengthen
international coordination on information-sharing, law
enforcement, border control and judicial systems, and
to learn important lessons to enhance their own national
action plans to more effectively combat the problem.
Criminal networks, armed groups and terrorists groups
must not be allowed to further thrive in situations of
instability and chaos, to prey on the fear, hardship and
misery of others caught in conflict and post-conflict
situations, or to profit from activities such as forced
labour, slavery and other forms of exploitation.

