Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
presiding over today's meeting in person and the
Secretary-General for the statement that he has just
made.

China condemns all acts of violence against
women in conflict situations, including sexual violence.
We call on all parties to conflicts to abide by
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We call on Governments to investigate and
punish the perpetrators of such crimes against women.
We also call on all countries to adopt measures for their
early accession to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women.

In view of the above, the Chinese delegation
voted in favour of resolution 1820 (2008) in April last
year and of resolution 1888 (2009) that we have just
adopted. Here, we would like to express our
appreciation for the efforts of Ambassador Rice and the
flexible approach and constructive attitude of the
United States Mission during the consultations.

With regard to improving the protection of
women in armed conflict, I would like to underscore
the following three points.

First, Governments bear primary responsibility
for protecting women and combating crimes of sexual
violence. The international community should provide
effective assistance in that regard. While the primary
responsibility for implementing resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) lies with Governments, both
conflict-affected countries and those in post-conflict
situations are often faced with many difficulties.
Therefore, the international and donor communities
should provide generous assistance to help their
capacity-building efforts. At the same time, I would
like to stress that the provision of external support and
assistance should comply with the principles of the
United Nations Charter and should respect the wishes
of the country concerned while not undermining its
sovereignty.
Secondly, women's participation in the different
stages of a peace process should be strengthened and
attention should be paid to their status and their role.
The rights and interests of women must be respected
and protected throughout the entire peace process and
their special needs and concerns heeded. They should

be given greater participation and more decision-
making power. In recent years, the Secretariat has
taken many positives steps to increase the number of
senior women officials and female heads of United
Nations special missions. We hope that those efforts
will continue in the future.

Thirdly, efforts should be made to encourage and
support the participation of civil society in the
protection of women. Many colleagues in
non-governmental organizations work on the ground
under difficult conditions to promote the protection of
women's rights and interests. Their work should be
acknowledged. China supports them in their continuing
constructive role to protect women in situations of
armed conflict. We encourage them to continue their
engagement with other United Nations agencies,
especially those directly involved in women's issues,
as well as to put forward reasonable proposals in that
regard.

The Chinese Government has always paid great
attention to improving the status of women and
protecting their rights and interests. We would like to
work together with the international community in our
common effort to reduce acts of sexual violence in the
world and to achieve the goals in the area of women
and peace and security.

