Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to wish a warm welcome to today's briefers and to
thank them for their very important contributions.

Allow me to begin by offering the heartfelt
condolences of the United States to the people of Sri
Lanka for the Easter Day terrorist attacks that killed
nearly 300 people and wounded hundreds ofothers. The
United States condemns those attacks in the strongest
terms. We stand with the Sri Lankan people, and we
remain ready to provide our assistance to the local
authorities as they work to investigate the attacks and
bring the perpetrators to justice.

The United States is resolute in recognizing
that conflict-related sexual violence is a matter of
international peace and security that demands collective
action to promote prevention, hold perpetrators
accountable and support survivors. None of us can turn
our backs on this issue. It requires the engagement of
all Member States and of the United Nations to support
the efforts of those fighting to protect women, provide
accountability and support survivors.

It is for survivors that the United States invests in
early warning and response initiatives to prevent sexual
violence in conflict. The promise ofa future without the
sexual violence that often accompanies conflict begins
with supporting communities to partner with security
and governance institutions to expand the effectiveness
of prevention efforts.

It is for survivors that the United States commitment to
justice and accountability is at the heart of our response
to this issue. As Special Representative Pramila Patten
noted, despite widespread reports of sexual violence in
conflict, such acts are often not investigated, let alone
prosecuted. Fear and stigma prevent survivors from
coming forward. Ending impunity would help deter
the recurrence of such crimes while ensuring survivors
access to the justice they deserve.
I would particularly like to welcome Ms. Nadia
Murad, and I commend her for her bravery in the face
of unimaginable terror and as a leading advocate for
supporting the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
(UNITAD). We support accountability for ISIL and
other perpetrators of those crimes, and we are working
with the Government of Iraq and other partners to help
ensure that ISIL is held accountable. As the United
States announced last year (see S/PV.8412), we are
providing $2 million to support UNITAD's efforts,
which include exhuming a mass grave in Kocho,
Ms. Murad's home village.

It is for survivors that we implement and fund
unique rapid response programmes for extreme forms
of gender-based violence, including the Voices Against
Violence fund that directly supports Yazidi women and
girls who escaped from ISIL. Ensuring that survivors
have access to the resources they need to heal and
recover is the first step in breaking the silence and
stigma that they experience, changing the norms that
enable and exacerbate violence in conflict and securing
the justice they so deserve so that they can use their
voices as agents of peace, live free from violence and
have access to equal opportunities.

Solutions require strategic responses that start with
best practices learned on the ground, with actors across
the United Nations system, civil society and Member
States playing important roles. Our commitment to
the maintenance of international peace and security
begins with those most affected by war, violence and
terrorism. By putting survivors at the heart of our
work, we enhance our understanding of the barriers to
security and are better positioned to build partnerships
with communities that lead to justice and prosperity.

We welcome today's open debate as an opportunity
to recognize how we can support survivors in building
the solutions that will help to prevent and eradicate
sexual violence in conflict. The United States
commends the work of the United Nations in that regard
and looks forward to continued efforts that explore the
entire cycle of conflict and gender-based violence.

The best long-term protection from sexual violence
in conflict comes from building societies where
women and girls are valued and their human rights
are respected. That includes institutionalizing equal
protections under the law and access to education and
opportunity, which are essential to enabling women's
participation in public life. We must also address
the root causes of sexual violence, such as structural
inequality and gender discrimination, which drive
this crime and result in perpetual cycles of violence
and injustice.

In humanitarian and disaster-response efforts, it is
essential that we promote safe communities and protect
vulnerable populations from all forms of violence. That
includes providing services, reducing risks, creating
a secure environment and challenging the norms
that exacerbate Violence and conflict and perpetuate
gender inequality.

Finally, we urge the United Nations and Member
States to invest in enhanced efforts to update early-
warning indicators and the investigation, monitoring
and disaggregation of reports on sexual violence in
conflict with a view towards informing prevention,
mitigation and accountability measures.

