Ms. Wallstriim (Sweden): I have come here directly
from a visit to Herat and Kabul, in Afghanistan. I met
with women and girls in the midst of conflict, who are
struggling to make ends meet and keep their families
safe. They face a constant risk of sexual violence. While
talking to those women, I wondered what the women
and peace and security agenda is doing for them.

Well, it should ensure that the women I met - for
instance, those who work in the security sector - have
more female colleagues and can work without the
threat of harassment. It should ensure that the female
mediators that Sweden has provided training for can
have a real role and work free from the shadow of
death threats. It should also have ensured that the girl I
met - who is 18 years old, was married away at 13 and
already has five children - could have perhaps had 10
more years to grow as a person, get an education and
realize her dreams in life.

The oppression of women is a global disease. We
see how women all over the world are systematically
underrepresented in decision-making, receive fewer
resources and lack fundamental rights in a number
of areas. Sexual violence as a weapon of war is a
horrendous manifestation of the oppression of women.
I got to see that up close when, as some members of the
Council might recall, I was appointed the first Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict some years ago. I often say that
it was a role that left me with a heavier heart, but also
with higher hope for the future, thanks to all the women
I met who did not want to be seen as victims alone, but
as actors, citizens and humans with full rights.

What I have come to realize was that we make three
mistakes when we look at this issue. We tend to view it
as inevitable, unspeakable and as a lesser crime. I had
that job back in 2010 and 2011, when resolution 1325
(2000) celebrated its 10-year anniversary. Today, that
resolution and seven more have existed for 17 years,
and we are unfortunately still far from eradicating
this horrendous practice. It saddens me, but it also
strengthens my resolve.

In order to achieve real results for the women
and peace and security agenda, we need to work
systematically, as we have already heard. In that regard
I thank all the briefers. We need to have a gender
perspective to all aspects of peacebuilding. Therefore,
let me point to three important aspects.

My first point, and this is also What everyone in
this Chamber can help in, concerns data and analysis,
because we can do much more about the situation on
the ground if we have and use disaggregated data on
women and men. As an example, that could concern
statistics on education, internally displaced people or
the number of women and men employed in the police
force. Once we have the data, we need to look at it
carefully before drawing conclusions. Reporting should
have an integrated gender perspective that feeds into the
Secretary- General's recommendations and conclusions.
Women's civil society organizations - which are often
at the front line - give valuable input. Sweden stands
ready to work with the United Nations to enhance data
collection and the analysis ofgender-disaggregated data.

My second point concerns expertise. Many reports
have highlighted how gender experts contribute to
the overall success of United Nations missions. I am
worried that budget cuts and mainstreamed mandates
could result in cuts in essential gender expertise in
United Nations missions. That would mean that we
risk leaving out half of the population in our critical
work on the protection of civilians or strengthening the
rule of law. We must all do better to train and provide
women to United Nations peace missions.
Thirdly, women's organizations and networks
receive a disproportionately small amount of
development funding. We have heard that already,
thanks to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka. That must change.
Whether in the public, private or non-governmental
organization spheres, there are networks of active
women who are actors for peace and security. We
should support women's organizations and networks
and enable them to participate fully at the local, national
and international levels.

When Sweden joined the Security Council, we set
out two overarching priorities: conflict prevention, and
women and peace and security. In all our work in the
Council, we have sought to operationalize the agenda
on women and peace and security. I am sure the Council
has heard our excellent Ambassador, Olof Skoog, ask
time after time where the women are, or whether we
can put more language on women's participation into
mandates, and so on. We do that, for instance, through
ensuring the inclusion of gender reporting in mission
mandates and adding criteria for listing sexual and
gender-based violence in sanctions regimes. We will
continue that work with commitment, not just on a day
like this but on every other day as well.

It gives me hope that the new United Nations

leadership places gender at the centre of its diplomacy
for peace. It also gives me hope to read the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/861), which points out that
meaningful participation by women has a demonstrable
impact on the sustainability and effectiveness of peace
processes, economic development and social prosperity.
There is momentum for women's participation in peace
processes. We should seize that momentum and place
women's full enjoyment of their rights at the core of
international peace and security. This is not a women's
issue. It is an issue of peace and security, essential to a
successful response to the many crises on the Council's
agenda. The frameworks and tools are all in place. It is
up to us to make it happen.

We know what is needed: political space, active
civil-society organizations, constant capacity-building.
And we have examples. For instance, in Afghanistan,
where the restructured High Peace Council has 13 female
and 39 male members, Sweden has supported local
female leaders in building their capacity to participate
in mediation and dialogue processes. In Somalia, the
political will shown by the National Leadership Forum
ensured a quota for women in Parliament, despite
resistance to their participation. In Colombia, as we
have heard, women's organizations paved the way for
their inclusion in the peace process.

True change can be achieved only with strong and
courageous political leadership. Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed set an example through the
joint United Nations-African Union high-level mission
to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which focused on women and peace and security and
development. We should build on that good example
and use that methodology in future country visits.
Gender equality makes societies more peaceful. Or,
as I like to put it, more women, more peace. We, the
Security Council, must show leadership, not only today
but across the country-specific files and in all aspects
of our work.

Let us remember Dag Hammarskjold's words: "No
peace which is not peace for all, no rest until all has
been fulfilled."

