Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank the
Government of Bolivia for convening this important
debate on the women and peace and security agenda.

No society can sustain peace or realize peace
dividends unless women are involved in the making
of decisions on peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation. There is sufficient
empirical evidence, including the examples cited in the
concept note for this debate (S/2018/904, annex), that
confirms that, when we invest in cultivating the values
of respect for the rights of women and gender equality
and the rejection of discrimination against women, the
chances are always higher that we will be able to sustain
peace and achieve social and economic progress.

The Security Council has adopted eight resolutions
over the past 16 years on the women and peace and
security agenda. We are pleased to note that significant
progress has been achieved in a number of countries, as
highlighted in the concept note. Furthermore, we would
like to acknowledge that resolution 1325 (2000) places
strong emphasis on achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women.

It is therefore time that the Council prioritize
a gender perspective in diagnosing security-risk
situations and in formulating solutions for reducing
such risks. The Council must consider the meaningful
participation and empowerment of women across all
agenda items, including in all mandate renewals. It
must provide the necessary leadership and follow-up
to the implementation of its resolutions on the topic,
and it must produce analytical evidence-based progress
reports. Most important, the women and peace and
security agenda must become part of the Council's
regular toolbox, in addition to debates such as the one
we are holding today.

Maldives is fortunate to have a tradition where
household decisions are taken jointly by women and
men in most situations. Maldives has always had
universal adult suffrage, and we have always had
maternal and paternal leave, which are now guaranteed
by law. There has never been discrimination in school
enrolment or employment, and now girls outperform
boys in secondary school graduation rates.

Beyond those achievements, Maldives is continuing
its efforts to overcome existing challenges to ensuring
respect for the rights of women. It is taking steps to
increase the number of women in executive positions
and decision-making roles in both the Government and
the private sectors, while continuously challenging
the traditional paradigm that women occupying senior
positions in companies or the Government have to make
a binary choice between career and family.

Through our employment act, Maldives has already
taken steps to ensure that women are ensured equal
access to employment and equal pay for equal work.
The act also makes it illegal to use gender or marital
status as a basis for terminating employment. In 2016,
Maldives enacted a gender equality act, which outlines
the steps that the Government, business entities,
non-governmental organizations and other employers
should take to ensure equality and non-discrimination
with regard to women and girls. It also requires the
Government and political parties to ensure that equal
opportunities exist for women and girls to participate
at all levels of political life.

Women are the custodians of the cultural and
spiritual values of a community. We must accept that
the role of women has changed at a rapid pace and that
women now profoundly affect all aspects of society.
We must ensure that women's progress is sustained and
accelerated, if we are to realize the promises set forth
in the Council's resolutions.
