Mr. Dieng: We are here today in the Chamber
not just to condemn a problem, but to find ways to
change it. In that spirit, I would like to sincerely thank
Uruguay for convening this critical debate, and Deputy-
Secretary-General Amina Mohamed; Ms. Mina Jaf,
Executive Director of Women's Refugee Route; and all
those who will speak today for lending their voices to
the search for solutions.

Our efforts to bring this crime out of the shadows
and into the centre of peace and security policy has had
a powerful normative and operational impact. But such
an impact is possible only when the Security Council,
Governments, civil society and the United Nations
system act in concert and with common purpose.

The annual report of the Secretary-General before
us today (S/2017/249) is harrowing in its depiction of
sexual violence as a tactic of war and terrorism, as a
tool of dehumanization and shame, and as a weapon of
punishment and persecution. The report brings to light
new dimensions of this scourge, including the use of
sexually enslaved women and girls as suicide bombers
and human shields or as a form of currency used to
compensate fighters and sustain military operations, as
if women were expendable resources in the machinery
of terrorism.

Behind every number presented in the report there
is a story, a face and a name. For instance, Nasima is an
Iraqi girl who was so afraid of being killed by her own
relatives upon returning from captivity under the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) that she attempted
suicide by eating rat poison. There is Sadiya, who was
kidnapped by Boko Haram and became pregnant as
a result of rape. When she was released, local militia
from her own community said they would return to kill
her "Koko Haram baby" as soon as it was born. There is
the case of Jean from the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, who was gang-raped by rebels. He was
mocked and ridiculed by his community and accused
of homosexuality. And there are many others like him,
particularly in the 62 countries that still provide no
legal protection for male victims of rape.

Marie, from the Central African Republic,
contracted HIV because she was too ashamed to
report her rape to a health clinic in time to receive
post-exposure prophylaxis. She, like many other
victims, is literally dying of shame. Then there is the
four-year-old boy who is known to his community
as Tonkotonko - a local term meaning the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) - because he was conceived
when his mother was raped by a commander of the
Lord's Resistance Army.

Sexual violence is a crime that can turn victims
into social outcasts. It can fracture families and corrode
the structures that bind communities. Fear and cultural
stigma prevent the vast majority of survivors from ever
coming forward. Whether it results in honour crimes,
suicide, untreated medical conditions, unsafe abortion,
extreme poverty or social exclusion, the consequences
can be lethal. Simply stated, stigma kills. Many women,
girls, men and boys survive the ordeal of rape, but not
its social repercussions. Often, they forego medical and
legal help in order to avoid the humiliation and victim-
blame that add insult to injury. Shame and stigma are
integral to the logic of rape employed as a tactic of war,
torture or terrorism. Aggressors understand that this
crime attacks individual and collective identity, social
relationships and status. As the Deputy Secretary-
General noted, there is a need to re-direct the stigma
of sexual violence from the victim to the perpetrator.
There is a need to recognize survivors as legitimate
victims of conflict and terrorism who are entitled to
relief, reparations and equality before the law.

The Security Council has once and for all rejected
the idea that rape is an inevitable by-product of war.
Let us add today that stigma cannot continue as an
inevitable by-product of rape. It must be addressed
not only as a long-term problem but as an emergency,
because lives are at stake. This is both a human rights
issue and a security issue. Stigma can tear communities
apart. It can perpetuate the vicious cycle of violence,
vulnerability and exploitation that prevents recovery.
For instance, when children born of rape are socially
marginalized and left undocumented and stateless, they
may have no other prospects for the future than to join
armed or extremist groups that fuel unrest.

Our aim must therefore go beyond merely
minimizing stigma, to empowering and restoring
respect for survivors. That entails mobilizing the moral
authority of traditional and religious leaders to shift
harmful social norms, including gendered notions of
honour and shame. By transforming perceptions in that
way, we can disarm the weapon of rape.

Stigma and victim-blame are compounded by the
historical absence of accountability for these crimes.
As the report notes, justice can have a cascade effect
whereby each verdict inspires another survivor to come
forward, and each sentence deters another would-be
perpetrator and puts commanders on notice. Over time,
that can convert cultures of impunity into cultures
of deterrence.

But we need to deliver justice, not just law.
That includes restorative, reparative justice, which
is what the survivors want most yet receive least.
When victims have the chance to tell their stories, to
observe the sentencing of offenders and to benefit from
solidarity and support, including material and symbolic
reparations, it can counteract isolation and self-blame.
It tells the community that what happened was not the
victim's fault.

In order to foster credible deterrence, justice
must be done and be seen to be done, not only in the
courtroom but also in the community. These offences
need to be part of the official historical record in order
to send the signal that no political or military leader is
above the law, and no civilian is beneath its protection.

Although we have seen landmark convictions over
the past year, such as the Bemba case, which centered
on command responsibility for sexual violence and
resulted in the longest sentence yet delivered by the
International Criminal Court, rape remains among
the least-condemned of crimes. Globally, it is far less
likely to be reported to the police than any other form
of physical assault.

For the survivors who still live in the midst of their
attackers, justice delayed is more than justice denied;
it is terror and insecurity continued. In other words,
slow justice is no justice. How many more rapes are
committed while the perpetrators remain at large and
the victims wait for the wheels of justice to turn? Let
me highlight just three of many such examples.

First, accounts ofwidespread and systematic sexual
violence - including sexual slavery, forced marriage,
forced impregnation and the trafficking of women and
girls - as a step in the process of destroying the Yazidi
community as a whole indicate that we may be living
through a genocide. And yet not a single militant of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has faced trial for
sexual violence crimes, anywhere in the world. Military
solutions are not sufficient. Bullets on the battlefield
cannot kill an ideology. We need justice according to
law. And we need to ensure that prosecution for rape is
not subordinated to other crimes.
Secondly, in South Sudan, pervasive impunity has
normalized extreme patterns of violence, including
conflict-related sexual violence, which is being
committed in a strategic manner that mirrors the fault
lines of the wider political and ethnic crisis.

Thirdly, the report notes that certain perpetrators
of emblematic mass rape incidents in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continued to commit rape and
other atrocities in 2016. Seven years after the notorious
rape of 387 civilians in Walikale, no perpetrator has
been tried and no survivor has received reparations.
Sheka, the rebel commander responsible, continues to
prey on the local populace, disrupting peacebuilding
and development efforts. And one local warlord will
continue to replace another until there are systems
and institutions in place capable of delivering justice
and deterrence.

In that respect, it is the primary responsibility
of national Governments to protect their people.
The United Nations can support, but never supplant,
their efforts. The response to sexual violence must
be multisectoral and holistic, a fact that successive
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General have
recognized in their role as Chair of the United Nations
Action Network, which unites the expertise of 13 United
Nations entities. However, the loss of infrastructure
and expertise occasioned by conflict dramatically
weakens the response. The Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, working
out of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, provides technical support
to bolster institutional capacity. The report covers
progress catalysed by the Team of Experts in settings
such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea
and cote d'Ivoire.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while
certain rebel fighters continue to evade arrest, the
Government has accorded a new level of seriousness to
these crimes and commitment to addressing them, as
evident in the prosecution of over 400 members of its
national armed forces since 2013.

In Guinea, 17 high-ranking military and political
officials have been indicted for crimes of sexual
violence committed as a tool of political repression in
September 2009, with trials due to commence shortly.

This year also marks the first delisting pursuant
to this mandate, namely, that of the Forces armees de
C6te d'Ivoire, which provides an instructive example
for other armies in terms of meeting the requirements
set out in resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013). They
include the adoption of codes of conduct, training,
the swift investigation of alleged offences and the
establishment of oversight mechanisms. That is part of
changing the culture of security institutions in order to
ensure they are accessible and responsive to all.

We now have to work with national and regional
security bodies to advance the implementation of
resolution 2331 (2016), so as to more effectively detect
and disrupt trafficking in persons in situations of
conflict for the purpose of sexual exploitation. That
will require enhanced information-sharing and judicial
cooperation. Since sexual violence has become part
of the shadow economy of conflict and terrorism, it
should be addressed in our global discourse and in
our action to curb financial flows to terrorist groups.
We must also be conscious of the shrinking space for
civil society actors to operate, particularly in contexts
affected by violent extremism, and ensure that they are
able to access the resources that will enable them to
deliver lifesaving services.

The Deputy Secretary-General has emphasized the
importance of prevention. We must indeed pay greater
attention to the risk factors, or red flags, for conflict-
related sexual violence in early-warning and early-
response efforts. In addition, we must examine the root
causes and enablers of such crimes, including the links
between economic and physical insecurity. The majority
of survivors come from marginalized, destitute or
displaced communities whose lives and livelihoods have
been devastated by war. Socioeconomic reintegration
support - including for women and girls who have
escaped the grip of ISIL, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and
other violent extremist groups i must therefore be part
of all of our peacebuilding and recovery efforts.

Peace begins with peace of mind. Those who have
been liberated from sexual slavery should never again
face the prison of stigma, a fate that some have described
as a living death. They should receive psychosocial,
livelihood and legal support; they should be recognized
as victims, not shunned as affiliates or children of bad
blood; and they should not be treated as intelligence
assets by the State. Peacebuilding and reconciliation
depend on empowering survivors and their families
so that they can participate in their nations' economic
and social recovery. We have the tools. We have the
resolutions. We now need sustained political resolve
and resources equal to the scale of the challenge.

