Ms. Smythe: I would like to underscore the fact
that women in conflict are not merely victims, but
active agents. I thank members for recognizing that
fact. I would also like, on behalf of Ms. Vaweka, one of
our closest partners and a role model for the women of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to thank
members for recognizing the good work that she is
doing.

I would like specifically to respond to the
question from France concerning the relationship
between the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
the Congolese Administration, especially the
Government Ministry for what is known as la condition
feminine, which could, perhaps, be translated as the
Ministry for Women and Family, as well as the
Ministry for Women and Human Rights. Indeed, the
gender unit has established contact with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we have had informal discussions and are trying to
sensitize the Government on the whole issue of gender
integration in every aspect of its work.

We have been holding discussions with the new
Minister for la condition feminine, planning a specific
activity in relation to the 16 Days of Activism Against
Gender Violence, from 25 November to 10 December.
We plan to use that as a strategy, in collaboration with
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), which has always accompanied women in
decision-making since the time of the inter-Congolese
dialogue. We plan to use that as a strategy to get the
women and men of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to recognize the position of the new Minister. It
is critical because she comes from an interesting area.

The Ministry responsible for the condition of
women is trying to work internally among colleagues
to sensitize the leadership on gender issues and to
establish networks with agencies and interested parties
to take the gender debate outside. We in the Gender
Unit plan to work not only with that specific Ministry,
but with all other ministries and Government agencies.
We plan to carry out training programmes with the
parliamentarians and the Senate and to work with the
judiciary very closely.

We have been approached by other ministries. For
example, we have been approached by the Ministry of
Education and asked whether we could do some work
with the universities. We are somewhat limited in terms
of capacity, but we hope that in the near future, now
that the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has
a physical presence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, that, in the context of collaboration, we can do
a little bit more than we have been doing.

We are very mindful of the fact that ours is a very
small outfit, but we are working in close collaboration
with the agencies that are there. Specifically, we have
collaborated with the Ministry of Health, which took
the lead recently on the issue of violence against
women, again in collaboration with UNIFEM. In that
context, we participated in the elaboration of an inter-
agency project to deal with the issue of violence
against women. Here I would stress that we are merely
collaborating; it is a joint effort on the part of the
agencies.

Our task as the gender ministry is to ensure that
women's voices are factored into the process. We are
working on the ground to find out about local
initiatives and what women themselves have been
doing, and then serving as the link with our colleagues
in the various agencies to make sure that this is taken
into consideration.

In summary, the gender ministry is working very
closely with various ministries, not only directly but
also in collaboration with agencies and with other
sections and divisions of MONUC.

