Mr. Begec (Turkey): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed for her briefing. Let me also
congratulate Ms. Pramila Patten on her appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict. I wish her success in
her endeavours and take this opportunity to assure
her of Turkey's firm support for her mandate. We also
commend the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The severe effects of the conflicts in various
regions today, especially on women and girls, continue
to constitute a significant challenge that needs to be
addressed. Unfortunately, the annual report (S/2017/249)
of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence once again reveals a daunting picture. The
current trends and emerging concerns pertaining to the
increased use of sexual violence as a weapon ofwar and
terrorism require a robust international response. We
welcome and support the Secretary-General's strong
emphasis on the importance of prevention. We also
agree with his approach that preventing sexual violence
is an integral part of wider conflict prevention.

When used or commissioned as a tactic of war or as
a systematic attack against a civilian population, sexual
violence significantly aggravates the severe effects of
an armed conflict. Perpetrators continue to employ
sexual violence, mostly combined with other crimes,
such as killing, forced displacement, arbitrary detention
and torture. In fact, the nexus between conflict-related
sexual violence and terrorism, human trafficking and
organized crime has become more pertinent than ever.

With that in mind, the despicable acts perpetrated
against women and girls by terrorist organizations,
such as Da'esh and Boko Haram, deserve every
condemnation. The use of sexual violence, including the
sale and trade of women and girls, as a tactic of terror
by Da'esh in Iraq and Syria reflects the appalling nature
of that terrorist organization. While Turkey continues
to fight against Da'esh with all its means, we believe
that it is high time for the international community to
act in unity for a comprehensive and inclusive approach
to eliminate the root causes of this menace.
Although in a different context, it is also befitting to
underline that the terrorist organization the Kurdistan
Workers' Party/Democratic Union Party (PKK/PYD)
likewise resorts to abuse and exploitation of women
and children. The terrorist leadership of the PKK/
PYD is known to commit sexual violence and abuse,
even towards its female recruits. That includes rape,
forced pregnancy and abortion and the carrying out of
sexual-abuse related executions.

We are witnessing new complexities around the
nature ofconflicts. The increasing number ofprotracted
conflicts, forced displacement and humanitarian
emergencies create an environment conducive to the
trafficking of women and girls. Trafficking often
involves sexual violence and exploitation. Turkey
attaches the utmost importance to the fight against
human trafficking, which constitutes a violation of
human rights and an offence to the dignity and the
integrity of the human being. In that regard, we recall
the importance of resolution 2331 (2016), which Turkey
co-sponsored.

As the crisis in Syria enters its seventh year, sexual
violence continues to be used by various parties as a
systematic tactic of warfare, terrorism and torture.
Millions of Syrians, particularly women and girls,
continue to live under the threat of sexual violence.
The horrific acts of sexual violence perpetrated in
the detention facilities run by the Syrian regime have
been documented in various United Nations reports. In
that context, Turkey's efforts pertaining to the release
of detainees and prisoners by the conflicting parties
within the framework of the Astana talks are all the
more relevant.

Furthermore, as a neighbouring country, we
continue to follow an open door policy with regard
to Syrians fleeing war and violence in their own
country - there are now over 3 million Syrians living
in Turkey. Empowering and ensuring self-reliance,
notably of Syrian women and youth, without any
bearing of sexual and gender-based violence, is of
crucial importance for us. That is why we exert every
effort to provide security and safety for them.

Last but not least, I would like to underline that
Turkey attaches the utmost importance to strengthening
the efforts aimed at implementing the zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations personnel. In that regard, we commend and
support the Secretary-General's efforts towards making
zero tolerance a reality.
