Ms. Bahemuka (Kenya): I would like to thank
the Romanian presidency for organizing this meeting
on an issue that we hold very dear to our hearts.

In his statement to the General Assembly on
17 September 2005, His Excellency President Mwai
Kibaki of Kenya placed women strategically at the
centre of all development activities. Today, with the
steady and sure progress towards the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission, the role of women in
initiating, nurturing and consolidating post-conflict
peacebuilding is a given. In our remarks during recent
informal consultations, my delegation stressed the need
to incorporate this important element early on in
building the formal architecture of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as the need to deepen the role of
women in the implementation of programmes to
empower them in post-conflict areas.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General and
his staff for the very useful report on women, peace
and security contained in document S/2005/636 dated
10 October 2005. The guidelines in that document
covers areas dear to my delegation. Those include,
inter alia, mainstreaming gender in peacekeeping and
political affairs; monitoring compliance with
international law; expanding gender-sensitive
programming in disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, mine-clearance, reconstruction and
HIV/AIDS prevention; institutionalizing women's
participation in decision-making; and preventing and
fighting against gender-based violence, including
sexual exploitation and abuse.

Regarding the enhancement of local women's
capacities for peacemaking and peacebuilding, I would
only urge greater synergy and energetic interface with
local women's groups. That coordination will build on
local best practices and obviate the need to reinvent the
wheel.

At the intergovernmental level, I would appeal
for closer coordination. The idea of working through
the High Level Committee on Programmes, with the
participation of all concerned organizations and
components of the United Nations Secretariat, is a very
good one. Our experience in using a system of lead
agencies to ensure dialogue, as proposed in the report,
suggests that such a plan has to be very carefully
implemented. Institutional conflicts and jealousies may
arise that can hamper any long-term gain for women.

The same can be said for coordination within the
United Nations itself. Appointing a group of focal
points instead of one focal point may diminish the
institutional rivalry that so frequently manifests itself
in our work. Kenya also supports the Secretariat's
recommendations to biennialize reporting on
implementation of the action plan. That can be
supplemented by interspersed thematic reports, which,
we agree, will balance the implementation and
policymaking cycles and make for more rigorous
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000).

In conclusion, let me highly commend the many
women who toil daily in the fields of the United
Nations system in the area of peace and security. I
thank them for their dedication, hard work and
commitment to the cause of the Organization. I
encourage them to continue their work fearlessly and
tirelessly, for the final objective is beneficial for all
mankind.

