Mr. Muburi-Muita (Kenya): Let me join other
delegations that have spoken before me in commending
you, Sir, for convening today's debate on women and
peace and security and also for your excellent
leadership in the work of the Security Council for this
month of October.

My delegation is cognizant that women are
critical agents of change in development, and that
investment in them creates a multiplier effect that
enriches and accelerates the improvement of their
status in society. Kenya affirms the centrality of gender
equality in all spheres of life including governance and
decision-making, and it recognizes the critical role that
women must play in development. As part of Kenya's
effort to fully implement this objective, the
Government has adopted a national policy on gender
development and established a national commission on
gender and development. The aim is to integrate
women in decision-making through legal, regulatory
and institutional reforms.

We must all emphasize the centrality of gender
mainstreaming, in particular by including women at all
levels of decision-making on peace and security issues,
and especially during conflict prevention and
resolution processes as well as in post-conflict
peacebuilding. Women's perceptions and concerns
should form an integral part of any peace process.
Women must be participants at the negotiating tables.
It is therefore gratifying to note that the United Nations
has, over the years and more particularly since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), made significant
progress in mainstreaming gender perspectives into
peace initiatives. Kenya further encourages this
decision and calls for the further involvement of local
women in all processes.

My delegation acknowledges that since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), significant
progress in its implementation has been achieved by
Member States, the United Nations system and civil
society. This year's report of the Secretary General
(S/2007/567) further demonstrates this encouraging
advancement. The progress is slow, however, and more
needs to be done to tackle institutional and
organizational gaps in the implementation. These
include the need for capacity to understand and
implement gender mainstreaming programmes,
leadership and commitment in implementing the
resolution, adequate accountability mechanisms and
resources and interagency coordination. In view of this,
Kenya welcomes the recommendations in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2007/567) aimed at
strengthening the implementation of the resolution.

Kenya appreciates that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operation has made strides in promoting
gender equality in peacekeeping operations and in the
incorporation of gender expertise in peacekeeping
missions. These have been useful steps, but we still
need to ensure sustained efforts in gender
mainstreaming at all levels of peacekeeping operations.
Currently, Kenya has deployed women to most of the
peacekeeping missions where we have troops, and we
are determined to increase the numbers.

Resolution 1325 (2000) emphasized the need to
incorporate gender perspectives in post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding. We are grateful to
note that increased attention has been given to the role
of women in post-conflict rebuilding processes,
especially in the judicial, legislative and electoral
sectors, as well as in the restoration of the rule of law
and transitional justice. Women still need considerable
support and capacity-building to be effective in new
democratic and legal structures that have traditionally
been dominated by men.

We commend the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) for their pivotal roles in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Over the
past decade, UNIFEM. and UNFPA have been at the
forefront of the promotion of the role of women in
peacebuilding and post-conflict situations, especially in
Africa. However, limitations in funding and resources
threaten to undermine this effort. We urge Member
States to explore strategies that will ensure the
alignment of resources with priorities and ensure
adequate and regular funding for activities related to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In conclusion, it is the sincere hope of my
delegation that the accountability, monitoring and
reporting system will be strengthened to ensure
enhanced coordination and implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

