Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Let me also
begin by commending your initiative, Mr. President,
to convene today's open debate on the critical issue
of women and peace and security and by thanking the
briefers for their informative presentations.

While aligning myself with the statement to
be made by the representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security and the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Turkey on behalf of the MIKTA group
of countries - namely, Mexico, Indonesia, South
Korea, Turkey and Australia - I would like to make
some brief comments on this important topic in my
national capacity.

Before I do so, allow me to congratulate this year's
Nobel Peace laureates, Ms. Nadia Murad and Mr. Denis
Mukwege, for their great contributions in fighting
wartime sexual violence. I see their receiving this
prize as the global community's solemn declaration of
solidarity with the victims of wartime sexual violence.
It holds all the more meaning for my country, which
still endeavours to support and honour the so-called
comfort women victimized during the Second World
War and turn their painful experience into lessons
of history.

Against that historical backdrop, the Republic of
Korea has the special moral obligation and political will
to make further contributions in advancing the women
and peace and security agenda. As part of our efforts in
that regard, my Government recently launched a new
initiative called "Action with Women and Peace". The
initiative involves increased funding and a policy focus
directed towards protecting women and girls during
and after armed conflicts and empowering them in
post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding processes.

Nearly two decades of the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda has yielded
considerable progress. However, there remains a
significant gap between our goals and the reality
on the ground. Women are still among the most
vulnerable groups in conflicts, and much needs to
be done in terms of women's political and economic
empowerment. Bearing that in mind, I would like to
highlight the following three points as we strive to
strengthen the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.

First, we must redouble our efforts to promote
women's leadership and participation in all aspects of
peace and security.

As the Secretary-General's report on women and
peace and security (S/2018/900) rightly points out,
women too often remain underrepresented in our
efforts towards conflict resolution. From 1990 through
2017, women constituted only 2 per cent of mediators
and 8 per cent of negotiators.

It is in this context that I commend the Secretary-
General's system-wide strategy for gender parity,
which led to the achievement of gender parity in the
United Nations Senior Management Group and among
Resident Coordinators. I encourage the United Nations
to continue to build upon this remarkable achievement.

In recent years, my Government has put a great
deal of emphasis on increasing women's participation
in the peace and security arena. We have now
exceeded the 15 per cent goal we set for female staff
officers and military observers in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

The ratio of women among Cabinet members has
also reached 27.8 per cent, the highest in our history.
In the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is currently
led by the first-ever female Minister, 60.9 per cent of
all 650 diplomats newly recruited over the past 10 years
have been women, and their retention rate stands at
94.5 per cent. It is indeed a remarkable achievement,
but my Government's efforts to achieve gender parity
will not stop here. Elevating women's participation in
all decision-making processes will continue to be a key
element of our second national action plan.

Secondly, we need to strengthen the role and
visibility of civil society in advancing the women and
peace and security agenda. In his report on that agenda,
the Secretary-General voiced concerns about shrinking
space and funding for civil-society organizations,
although we can benefit immensely from their expertise
and grass-roots networks.

In the case of the Republic of Korea, civil society's
active participation in advancing the women and peace
and security agenda has been at the heart of our national
action plan from the very beginning, and we will
monitor its implementation together with civil expert
groups. As part of our new initiative entitled "Action
with Women and Peace," we will host an international
conference under the tentative title of "Seoul Forum for

Women and Peace" next year. We hope that it will serve
as a valuable forum for shedding light on best practices
and channelling the expertise and experience of civil
society into concrete national policies.

Thirdly, more resources and attention should
be directed towards the empowerment of local
communities. A sustainable and long-term solution to
sexual violence in conflict as well as the promotion
of women's representation is possible only when
local community leaders become advocates for
women's rights and support the mainstreaming of
gender perspective into post-conflict recovery and
peacebuilding processes.

It is for this reason that my Government has
partnered with UNICEF and the United Nations
Population Fund and launched new development
cooperation projects aimed at increasing awareness
among and the empowerment of local communities,
providing safe spaces and legal support. Our new women
and peace and security project, through the African
Union Peace Fund, will also help local communities
be better prepared to increase women's participation in
various peace processes.

With the twentieth anniversary of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) around the corner, we should
no longer be satisfied with celebrating exceptions. We
should continue to work to further advance the women
and peace and security agenda until its principles
become norms rather than goals or best practices.
The Republic of Korea will remain firmly committed
to working closely with the international community
to protect and empower women so that the world will
become a better place to live in peace.

