Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement that will be delivered by the
representative of the European Union. Germany would

like to thank the United States of America, in its
capacity as presidency of the Security Council, for
giving this important issue such a prominent role on
this month's Council agenda.

The appointment of Ms. Wallstrom in February
this year was an important signal that increased and
focused action would be undertaken in the fight against
the scourge of sexual violence in conflict. No one can
deny that sexual violence in armed conflict is an
abhorrent crime that in some conflict areas is
systematically used to destabilize whole societies, and
thus constitutes a serious security problem requiring a
systematic response, including by the Security Council.
With the adoption of resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009), the Council gave this issue the comprehensive
and global attention it deserves. We therefore strongly
welcome the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/604)
and its recommendations, which are reflected in the
new resolution 1960 (2010) adopted by the Security
Council today. It is a good resolution. We commend all
Security Council members for agreeing on this
important document in such a short period of time.
This underlines the urgency of the problem and shows
that the Council is sincerely committed to tackling this
issue.

As exact data is indispensable to taking timely
and concrete action to prevent and react to sexual
violence, Germany fully supports the creation of a new
mechanism that may help to collect relevant data. This
mechanism should work similarly to and in close
cooperation with the one already existing on children
and armed conflict, and also take into account the
indicators endorsed by the Security Council in October
during its open debate (see S/PV.6411) on resolution
1325 (2000).

Collecting data is not enough, but it is a much-
needed first step in the fight against impunity.
Perpetrators have to be brought to justice. Bearing in
mind the main responsibility of States to investigate
and prosecute those abominable crimes, international
cooperation and the continued leadership of the
Security Council are also of utmost importance. We
therefore support the Secretary General's proposal to
set up a listing and de-listing mechanism, such as that
for sexual violence against children. Moreover, the
Council must make full use of all existing instruments
at its disposal, such as relevant sanctions committees,
to address sexual violence, including by referring
relevant cases to the International Criminal Court.
Moreover, we must strive to find better ways of
guaranteeing the safety and physical integrity of
women and children during armed conflict. This
includes early warning mechanisms, as well as more
awareness-raising campaigns and pertinent training,
including the training of peacekeepers. Germany
supports several training programmes and awareness-
raising campaigns on sexual violence, in close
cooperation with United Nations entities.

Finally, victims of sexual violence and abuse
need help to treat the physical and mental scars left on
them and their families and to enable them once again
to actively participate in communal life. States must
therefore provide adequate protection services and find
prompt and non-bureaucratic ways to support victims,
where appropriate with the help of the United Nations
system. Germany commends the United Nations
organizations on their valuable work in this field,
including the important activities of the Trust Fund in
Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence against
Women, which Germany has actively supported in the
past.

Allow me to conclude by stressing that we can
make progress only if all relevant entities within the
United Nations system, including the newly-created
UN Women, work together closely, while also actively
involving civil society stakeholders.

