Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I would like to thank
the Peruvian presidency of the Security Council for
convening today's open debate on this very important
issue. Portugal values the fact that the Council
continues to give its attention to the women and peace
and security agenda, which is an essential tool for
preventing conflict and for ensuring more effective
responses to today's complex crises.

As the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/250) notes, conflict-related sexual violence is
accompanied by the violation of other human rights.
Women's security is clearly linked to the fulfilment
of human rights, be they political, civil, economic,
social or cultural rights. Furthermore, the report also
clearly indicates that sexual violence can cause long-
term physical and psychological trauma and shred the
social fabric. It is therefore essential to ensure that all
necessary measures are taken, to strengthen justice
mechanisms, to hold accountable those responsible for
sexual violence, and to end impunity. It is also of the
utmost importance to address the persistent barriers
that prevent reporting wartime sexual violence. We
need more effective and rigorous investigations for
bringing to justice the perpetrators of all these crimes.

Portugal has been implementing resolution 1325
(2000) since the development of our first national action
plan in 2009. Currently, our second national action plan
includes training programmes on gender equality and
violence against women and young women, including
sexual violence, gender-based violence and trafficking
in human beings, in the fields ofjustice, armed forces
and security forces; the inclusion ofissues related to the
womenandpeace andsecurityagendainourdevelopment
cooperation, notably aiming at the implementation
of resolution 2106 (2013); ensuring that measures are
taken so that all victims of violence, including sexual
violence, have the right to protection and reparation, and
that perpetrators are held accountable; and promoting
awareness-raising programmes on health and human
rights issues, including on sexual violence and gender-
based violence.

Preventing sexual violence in conflict is possible
only if all stakeholders are involved in finding durable
solutions. In that regard, it is essential to work closely
with civil society. Civil society organizations often play
an instrumental role in ensuring the full implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, including
by complementing the work done by military, security
and civilian personnel in conflict and post-conflict
settings and in emergency situations. They are often
essential to preventing and reporting crimes and to
alerting the international community to such crimes,
to restoring the internal stability of their countries and

to supporting reconstruction efforts and helping the
population recover.

Finally, allow me to draw the Council's attention
to the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, which supports the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). It is a relevant
initiative of which Portugal is a proud member.

