Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
extend my congratulations to the delegation of Viet
Nam on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. I also wish
to express our appreciation to the United States for its
excellent leadership during the month of September.
We are also very grateful to you, Mr. President, for
personally presiding over this important discussion. I
would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Migiro for her presence here today and for delivering
the message from the Secretary-General. Obviously,
our gratitude goes also to the representatives of United
Nations entities and the NGO Working Group for their
useful briefings, because their dedication to promoting
the role of women in peace and security is greatly
appreciated.

Even nine years after the adoption of the very
important landmark resolution 1325 (2000), we cannot
fail to see that many innocent women and children live
under fear and want in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Clearly, much remains to be done. Japan
therefore welcomes today's debate and the decision of
the Council to adopt resolution 1889 (2009).

Today I would like to address three issues: the
role of women, the protection of women and
empowering women.

First, it is vitally important to ensure that
women's perspectives and the particular needs of
women and girls are reflected at every stage of the
peace process. We need to promote the full and equal
engagement of women from the earliest stages of the
process of peace negotiations and peacebuilding,
because that is the most effective way to prevent the
recurrence of conflict.

We welcome the fact that three women are now
serving as heads of missions. Women are playing
indispensable roles in some peacekeeping operations.
One example is the Indian women's formed police unit in
Liberia, which is very impressive. The Peacebuilding
Commission, for its part, has incorporated a gender
perspective in its country-specific peacebuilding
strategies.

We are also encouraged by the commitment of the
Secretary-General to increase the number of women in
decision-making positions, as confirmed by the Deputy
Secretary-General this morning. We urge other heads of
international organizations and regional organizations to
do the same and appoint more women as high-level
mediators and members of negotiating teams.

Secondly, we must extend support to women
suffering from the consequences of conflict by working
to provide them with greater physical security. The
Security Council has mandated many United Nations
peacekeeping operations to respond to violence against
civilians, but the Council has not fully succeeded in
meeting the high expectations.

The Council should continue to explore how
United Nations missions can better protect women and
children in conflict, with adequate resources, training
and logistical support. We would like the importance of
protection of women to be fully incorporated into
training programmes for peacekeepers and
peacebuilding experts on the ground, before they are
deployed. It is important to attach higher priority to the
protection of women in mission planning and to
strengthen gender units through the placement of
gender advisers.

It is totally unacceptable that perpetrators of
sexual and other serious Violence against women and
girls are shielded by a culture of impunity. The culture
of impunity is a direct threat to women's security, and
it also hinders women in playing the vital role they
might otherwise play in post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts. We need to redouble our efforts to end
impunity by assisting countries in strengthening
political leadership and the rule of law. Targeted
sanction measures should be effectively utilized.

We hope that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to be appointed soon in accordance
with resolution 1888 (2009) will take a strong lead in
addressing this serious issue.

Thirdly, we need to focus not only on protection
but also on the empowerment of women, who could be
strong promoters of the peacebuilding process. We must
find a way to ensure the empowerment of women in post-
conflict situations, by improving their socio-economic
conditions. This can be achieved b promoting access to
health services, education, vocational training, income
generation activities and land and property rights.

Unless we succeed in creating such conditions, I
am afraid that it difficult to consolidate peace and
prevent the recurrence of another conflict.

This is a major challenge the Council must
address. We are therefore pleased that resolution 1889
(2009), just adopted, stressed this aspect: the importance
of empowering women and girls in responding to their
particular needs in post-conflict situations.

In that regard, I would like to emphasize that the
human security approach that Japan has been
advocating for more than 10 years provides valuable
guidelines both to protect people's lives and dignity
from serious threats and to empower them to realize
their full potential.

One good example is cited in the Secretary-
General's latest report: the project is funded through
the United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security to
deliver health care, education and counselling to
women and girls in Nepal who have been left
vulnerable by conflict in that country.

In closing, I would like to recall the suggestion I
made on a prior occasion when we discussed this issue:
to compile a handbook with a list of good practices on
women's participation in the process of reconciliation
and peacebuilding. I very much hope that appropriate
follow-up can be made by the Secretariat.

