Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to congratulate your Government,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
meeting. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
in the Chamber of the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly at the beginning of
the meeting. I would like to thank them and the
Council's special invitees for their important
statements.

The annals of modern history document the use
of sexual violence as a weapon of war. The conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Darfur and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are but the most
recent and notorious examples. The recurring nature
and increase in the number of acts of sexual and
gender-based violence mean that such violence has
gone from being a weapon of war to an epidemic. That
is especially true in countries where the absence of the
rule of law makes it impossible for the State to provide
the necessary protection to millions of women and
girls.

Moreover, it is generally accepted today that
systematic acts of sexual and gender-based violence
are violations of human rights, affect human security
and development and represent an assault on
international peace and security. As a result, the
international community has classified such criminal
behaviour as crimes against humanity and given the
special courts established by the Security Council and
the International Criminal Court jurisdiction in trying
and convicting those guilty of committing such crimes.

However, despite those efforts and other
normative progress made in this area, in particular the
Security Council's adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
women and girls continue to be subject to all sorts of
discriminatory violence. It is therefore essential that
the Security Council duly consider the use of sexual
and gender-based violence as a weapon of war and
devise mechanisms to mitigate, eliminate and
effectively punish that practice. In doing so, it is
imperative to recognize that justice is the main

guarantor of human rights. The Security Council must
therefore send a clear warning that acts of sexual
violence against women and girls in situations of
armed conflict will not go unpunished. It must also
provide special support for the International Criminal
Court to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes are
tried and convicted.

The Council must also establish clear, convincing
and viable mandates for peacekeeping operations that
ensure the protection of civilians, especially women
and girls. Where appropriate, the Council must also
reassess the effectiveness and scope of such mandates.
In that regard, the Council should also support the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy for personnel
working in peacekeeping operations.

Likewise, the Security Council and the rest of the
Organization should redouble their efforts to provide
victimized women and children with adequate health
services - including free and confidential testing for
HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases, as well as
the appropriate treatment, psychological care and post-
trauma evaluation, rehabilitation and social
reintegration services and effective and sufficient
compensation. Those efforts should be supported by
awareness-raising and education campaigns on the
human rights of women and children and the impact
that sexual violence has both on its victims and on
society in general.

In order to improve the ability of the Security
Council to react effectively to this challenge, we need
credible and relevant information about sexual
violence. It is therefore imperative that the Secretary-
General provide the Council with periodic reports
highlighting the deep-rooted causes of the
phenomenon, as well as the most effective strategies to
combat it. In relevant cases, the Secretary-General
should also include more detailed information about
the issue in his reports on specific conflict situations.

In conclusion, allow me to emphasize the need to
acknowledge that women and girls are crucial pillars of
society. Ending the cycle of violence against them
before, during and after armed conflict depends in
large part upon their empowerment and active
participation in all areas of the political, social,
economic and cultural life of their countries. To put it
slightly differently, women and girls require peace, and
peace requires them.

