Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): As a strong
supporter of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
we welcome the study and report (S/2002/1154) on
women, peace, and security undertaken pursuant to that
resolution. We also look forward to the independent
experts' assessment of the impact of armed conflict on
women and of women's role in peace-building, an
important supplement to the Secretary-General's
efforts.

We welcome what we perceive as a common
thread running throughout the recommendations of the
study - that is, the emphasis on the necessity for
women actively to participate in all political, judicial,
economic, military and other decision-making
processes at the local, national and international levels.

Effective peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-
building, as well as post-conflict reconstruction and the
effective delivery of humanitarian assistance, are
impossible without the active participation of women,
who are both disproportionally affected by armed
conflict and disproportionately uninvolved in decisions
related to armed conflict. While it is important to
sensitize everyone - men and women alike - to
gender issues relating to armed conflict, and while men
are also capable of adopting gender-based approaches
to peace and security, it remains a fact that decision-
making will continue to be paternalistic and, what is
more, ineffective if decisions are made on behalf of
women instead of with their active involvement.

Against that background, we are particularly
pleased that the study on women, peace and security
calls on the international community to identify
women's informal peace-building initiatives, to provide
technical and financial support and to establish
mechanisms to channel the outcome of such initiatives
into formal peace processes, including Track II
negotiations. We believe this constitutes a pragmatic
and useful approach to help integrate women's
expertise in the formidable task of creating peace.

For several years, Liechtenstein has supported
efforts to bring about a change in the dramatic under-
representation of women as special representatives and
special envoys. We are therefore please that the study
before us gives due attention to this matter, which is
indeed of utmost importance, and we hope that speedy
progress can be achieved in this area, obviously with
the help of Member States. As far as the participation
of women is concerned, women as special
representatives and envoys can have a major catalytic
effect, and their appointment to such posts must
therefore be a high priority.

The Secretary-General's study clearly identifies
the need for international legal action to combat
violence against women, particularly in situations of
armed conflict. The ad hoc tribunals established by the
Security Council have greatly aided the creation of
such an international legal framework. We believe that
the International Criminal Court (ICC), as the
cornerstone of this emerging international effort to
fight impunity, will accelerate the progress made in
combating violence against women. The Rome Statute
and its supplemental documents contain detailed
provisions criminalizing gender-based and sexual
violence committed in the context of war crimes,
crimes against humanity or genocide.

While individual cases before the ICC that apply
the relevant provisions of the Rome Statute will be
instrumental in providing redress to victims and in
advancing the law at the international level, perhaps
even more important are the ongoing efforts to
implement the definitions of those crimes in domestic
legislation and to apply them in domestic courts. Such
efforts are encouraged by the legal and political
incentives that the ICC provides for States to
investigate and prosecute such crimes themselves. That
makes the speedy ratification of the Statute by the
largest possible number of States a necessity. No one,
regardless of his or her motivation, status or
nationality, can be allowed to enjoy impunity for the
commission of crimes of sexual or gender-based
violence.

Liechtenstein has consistently supported efforts
to end impunity, and we have been particularly
committed to ensuring that a gender-based approach is
taken in the administration of international justice. Of
the utmost importance is the participation of women at
the highest level of judicial administration, as judges,
prosecutors and other court officials. We are
particularly pleased that the Assembly of States Parties
of the International Criminal Court has adopted a
procedure implementing the requirement of the Rome
Statute that States take into account the need for fair
representation of women and men when judges are
elected. We would like to take this opportunity to call
on States to ensure that an adequate number of female
candidates are nominated for the first election of judges
to be held by the Assembly of States Parties, in
February.

We are committed to the idea that the
advancement of the rights of women is inextricably
linked to the advancement of peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has given the international
community an additional tool to put that idea into
practice, supplementing essential legal instruments
such as the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and its
Optional Protocol, the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols and the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its supplementary Protocols, as well as the Rome
Statute. Thus, it is clear that the standards have been
set and that we all now face the task of applying those
standards and thus of ensuring their implementation.

