Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation wants to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission for his briefing. My delegation, of course,
aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Bangladesh on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, but I would nonetheless like
to add a number of specific comments.

Transforming conflict situations requires the
United Nations to continuously review its working
methods with respect to the maintenance of
international peace and security in the light of the
complexity and multifaceted nature of peacekeeping
operations. The Kingdom of Morocco stresses the
importance of enhancing the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), which is an important body, to
enable it to ensure its structural, organizational and
operational effectiveness, including with respect to the
financing of the Peacebuilding Fund.

My country takes note with interest of the
co-facilitators' review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex). Its
recommendations merit sustained attention, including
those on coordination among local and international
actors, strengthening the quality and staffing of the
Secretariat's Peacebuilding Support Office, and on
generating fresh momentum in the cooperation between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission.

Peacebuilding will not yield the success we desire
without the active involvement of the host State from
the very moment that a peacekeeping operation is
deployed. Moreover, the experience gained by the
Peacebuilding Commission shows that no
peacebuilding activity can be successful without
including social and economic activities, such as
economic revitalization, youth employment, the
development of infrastructure and the provision of
essential services. Along with previous speakers, I
want to underscore the need for a partnership approach
to peacebuilding involving host countries, the United
Nations, troop-contributing countries and donors.

Here, we welcome the Secretariat's steps to forge
an active peacebuilding partnership with the World
Bank. However, we believe that regular consultations
among the World Bank, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations would enable
the United Nations to fine-tune the strategies for post-
conflict States.

Peacebuilding is by its very nature more a
civilian than a military exercise. Therefore, it is
essential, as underscored by the Secretary-General in
his report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict (S/2010/386), to create necessary civilian
capacity in specialized and specific areas such as
mediation and justice and security sector reform.

In addition, peacebuilding will be effective only
if women are actively and effectively involved in their
societies. In this regard, we support the seven
commitments of the action plan proposed in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/466). We believe,
furthermore, that greater involvement by women in
political life, the mediation process and the planning of
sensitive activities would promote lasting peace. We
are convinced that the new gender entity, led by
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, will also make a substantial
and valuable contribution to this goal.

We can never say it too often: The challenges
related to peacebuilding are insignificant when
compared to the costs of conflict and cannot be met
without the political, moral and financial support of
States, in particular that of neighbouring States, which
must, first and foremost, abide by the requirements of
good-neighbourliness and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, a prerequisite for the promotion of friendly
relations, peacemaking, peacebuilding and the
establishment of regional security.

