Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom was pleased to vote in favour of resolution
2493 (2019), which South Africa proposed today, and
we are very grateful for your efforts, Sir, to secure
Council consensus on the resolution and the efforts of
your Mission.

We welcome the resolution's focus on
implementation. Implementation is the United
Kingdom's main priority on women and peace and
security as we look forward to the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) next year. We
believe that today's resolution represents the final push
that the Council needs to provide on implementation.
From the United Kingdom's perspective, our focus
should now be on delivering on the ambition of the full
existing framework of women and peace and security
resolutions and not on producing more texts.

Turning to the text itself, we endorse its confirmation
of the Council's call for full - and I stress the word
"full" i implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
its encouragement of increased engagement by Member
States and United Nations agencies, as well as increased
support for civil society.

The emphasis on full implementation - and again,
I stress "full" - is Vital. The implementation gap is
visible right the way across the women and peace and
security agenda. We have not seen sufficient progress
in ensuring women's meaningful participation, in
increasing the number of women in peacekeeping or
in building an effective response to conflict-related
sexual violence.

In all cases, this needs to include sexual and
reproductive health services. I know that not all
Member States agree with this, but from the perspective
of the United Kingdom sexual and reproductive health
services are a vital part of public services for women in
all countries and a vital part of ensuring that women can
play a truly equal role in the building of their countries.
We welcome the resolution's support for the creation
of safe and enabling environments for civil society, as
well as the importance of funding, which we consider to
be essential for organizations and individuals to carry
out their work free of interference and free from fear.

However, I have to say that the United Kingdom
was disappointed that the Council did not seize
the opportunity to draft a resolution that was more
ambitious in scope.

First, we believe that the resolution would have
broken new ground if it had included explicit language
on women human rights defenders and their protection
and security. The work of women human rights
defenders is essential to the functioning of democracy
and the maintenance and achievement of peace.

Secondly, we regret that it was not possible to
include broader recognition of civil society's roll in
implementation. We talk a lot about implementation
in meetings and events in New York, but civil society,
and especially women at the grass-roots level, are
responsible for making the Council's resolutions a
reality on the ground. They are the ones on the front
lines, and they need increased recognition and support
in order to effect greater and more effective change.

