Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank

the Secretary-General, Major General Kristin Lund and
Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their informative briefings.

The State of Kuwait aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

I should like to address three issues within the
framework of our discussion today, namely, the
protection of civilians, increasing the participation of
women, and reforms.

First, with regard to the protection of civilians,
most peacekeepers work within missions where the
protection of civilians is at the core of their mandate.
In many missions, including the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, women constitute a significant
percentage of those civilians who seek the protection of
peacekeepers, as Ms. Merekaje mentioned. Hence the
active participation of women peacekeepers in all the
components of any mission is a response to the actual
requirements and is needed to engage and communicate
with local communities while focusing first and foremost
on the population as part of a people-centred approach,
without interfering in the primary responsibility of
countries to protect their citizens.

Secondly, with regard to increasing the participation
of women, troop-contributing countries make tireless
efforts to ensure the deployment of peacekeeping
forces, including women, after adequate training so
that we can guarantee their safety, as we have pledged
to do in various United Nations forums. Improving
performance therefore is an important factor in
increasing the participation of women in peacekeeping
at all levels, including leading positions such as Force
Commanders and Police Commissioners. Our ambition
of achieving 15 per cent women's participation might
seem modest. However, the percentage of women
participating in peacekeeping varies from one country
to another, and we cannot apply one model on every
individual country.

Thirdly, with regard to reforms, the Declaration of
Shared Commitments is the result of the efforts by the
Secretariat and Member States to advance the reform
process. Kuwait and more than 150 countries have
pledged, inter alia, to ensure women's participation in
all phases ofa peace operation, including peacekeeping.

In conclusion, we hope that this discussion in
the Council, as well as that in its Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, will contribute to increasing
the participation of women in peacekeeping by using
various means, including highlighting women as
role models in peacekeeping operations, such as in
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus,
where three women are in command of the Force as
well as its military and police components. Since the
presidency has encouraged us to cite few examples, I
would mention and commend Major General Kristin
Lund, who is present with us today. She is a role model
for many women in peacekeeping operations, not only
because she is the first woman to hold the position
of Force Commander but also because in Kuwait we
have also recognized her: she has received the Order of
Liberation from my country as a token of appreciation
to her and to tens of thousands of other women who
contributed to the liberation of Kuwait.

