Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this open debate of the Security Council
on women and peace and security. The perspective
you have given to the issue, with a focus on displaced
women and girls, is particularly timely and interesting
to us.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.

All over the world, women are disproportionately
affected by armed conflict and conflict-related
situations. Violence, harassment, sexual abuse, lack
of access to education and the most basic health-care
facilities, as well as water and food shortages, are only
some of the many threats and challenges they face
every single day. In terms of displacement, up to 80 per
cent of the more than 50 million refugees and displaced
persons are found to be women and children.

Italy has been a strong advocate of the women and
peace and security initiative since its inception. In
2010, we were the first country to call for the women
and peace and security agenda to be integrated into the
framework of the universal periodic review mechanism.
Our national action plan has already been revised once
this year to accelerate its implementation in the next
three years. The latest version not only reports on
progress, but also illustrates the efforts that have been
made to adopt a more effective approach. Our new
national action plan hinges on two main concepts: first,
enhancing coordination and integration among the
various administrations dealing with women and peace
and security; and secondly, mainstreaming gender-
related issues into all socioeconomic initiatives.

While national plans are pivotal instruments, some
15 years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
they are no longer enough. We need an international
plan that connects all the national plans. In a globalized
world, where international issues become domestic
problems, or domestic problems become international,
the question of displaced people, refugees and induced
migration is a huge challenge for the countries under
the most pressure. Italy is one of those.

With its tradition of tolerance, understanding
and inclusiveness, Italy will always stand by people
who, against their will, find themselves in desperate
situations caused by dreadful conflicts or human rights
violations in their homeland. While entire populations
have no other choice but to flee, too often without a
destination, their migration can also create tensions
in the new land, where people might be struggling to
make a living. In that situation, it is no wonder that
women and girls become the most vulnerable targets.

Since conflicts and tensions migrate from
one country to another, together with population
movements, the response must be global. No country
in the world can react effectively on its own and no
country in the world should be left alone to respond to
and address such problems. In that context, a new target
of the women and peace and security agenda is needed
to address, at the global level, the question of refugees
and displaced women and girls, as well as their forced
migration. Our aim must be to see women not only as
victims but also as protagonists, with the opportunity
and tools to play an important role as promoters of
peace, security, understanding and integration.

