Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): Since its
adoption, resolution 1325 (2000) has become a valuable
tool in the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
and in particular for the implementation of the concept
of sustaining peace.

Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I would
now like to make a few remarks in my national capacity.

The past 17 years have demonstrated that women
are key actors in promoting peace. Nonetheless,
only half of the peace agreements concluded contain
provisions relating to women. The presence of women
in peacekeeping missions has a positive effect on the
local female population, allowing women to ensure
that they are not only perceived as victims but also as
providers of security. They also serve as a model of
inspiration for women and girls to play a more active
presence in society.

We welcome initiatives by the United Nations since
2015 that have contributed to gender equality and to
the increasing role of women. In that regard, Romania
greatly appreciates the personal commitment of the
Secretary-General. However, more remains to be done.
We can see that there is a great need for more women
in command-level posts in peacekeeping operations.
We appreciate the initiative of the Police Division to
launch a training course exclusively for female staff
candidates for leadership positions, including within
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Romania is a strong proponent of the integration of
women into the troop contingents deployed in United
Nations missions, and we are proud that a female
Romanian police officer has been awarded the title
of International Female Police Peacekeeper for 2015.
Currently, another Romanian policewoman occupies
the post of Chief of Operations at the United Nations
Mission in Liberia.

In implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
the Romanian Ministry of Defence adopted a plan
of action to implement the women and peace and
security agenda, and currently 40 Romanian military
women are involved in United Nations missions or of
other international organizations, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Afghanistan, the Balkans and
Georgia. It is also important to involve more women
in processes related to the promotion of lasting peace.
Romania therefore joined the network of women and
peace and security national focal points officially
launched in New York on 23 September 2016. I would
like to add that, on 13 and 14 June 2017, the Romanian
Ministry of Defence organized a regional conference
in Bucharest on gender mainstreaming in security
and defence, and Romania joined the United Kingdom
and Peru in an event organized for the opening of the
current General Assembly session on the presence of
women in peacekeeping operations.

Our representatives also participate in the United
Nations Senior Missions Leaders Training Course, which
is currently taking place in Dakar and is being organized
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support. Romania is also involved
in the Female Military Officers Course, co-organized
by UN-Women in Nairobi. Our resolute commitment
to realizing women's enormous potential is also
reflected in the fact that, on 1 and 2 November, we will
organize in Bucharest a conference of the women ofthe
International Organization of La Francophonie.

Building and keeping peace is a ongoing process
that requires the broadest possible popular support and
the participation ofall segments ofsociety, among whom
women play an essential role. Romania is resolutely
convinced that all the players - States, regional
organizations, civil society and the media - should
continue to work together for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.

