Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank France for convening this important
open debate on women and peace and security.

I also thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti for
her valuable briefing, and the other briefers for their
important comments and remarks.

We celebrate today the seventeenth anniversary
of the adoption of the women and peace and security
agenda, which has become an important pillar in conflict
prevention and resolution, humanitarian action and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Despite the
international consensus on the vital role of women in
peace, security, human rights and development, States
and organizations still have a long way to go in order
to achieve these goals. We therefore need to redouble
our efforts to address the root causes of the challenges
that confront women and undermine their rights. In this
regard, and in the interests of time, I would like to focus
on three main challenges.

First, occupation represents one of the main
obstacles to women's advancement and is the most
heinous violation of rights, freedoms and international
norms. Every day, Palestinian and Arab women suffer
under the Israeli occupation, which commits all forms of
violence, including sexual violence, arbitrary detention,
physical and psychological torture, amounting to war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

Secondly, we note the increasing violence in
conflict zones and the growing threat posed by
non-State actors, sectarian militias and terrorist groups.
Atrocities are being committed on a daily basis against
civilians, women in particular, by the Syrian regime,
Iranian sectarian militias, the terrorist Hizbullah
militia, Houthi militias, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, Al-Qaeda and Boko Haram in Syria, Yemen,
Iraq, Nigeria, Somalia and elsewhere.

Thirdly, we see the spread of violent extremist
discourse against Muslims and Islam, including
women. Women are oppressed even in countries that
call for democracy and religious and personal freedoms.
These countries enact laws that limit the freedom
of women, including their religious freedom, and
prevent them from participating in public life merely
because of the way they look. All of these practices
run counter to our goal of empowering women and
respecting their religious and ideological freedom.
All of these challenges adversely affect economic and
social development and undermine the well-being and
prosperity of women and society.

In order to address these challenges, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia calls on the Security Council
and other United Nations entities overseeing the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda to confront these challenges comprehensively
and consistently, end occupation and colonization,
and refrain from supporting oppressive sectarian
regimes and sectarian militias. We should all combat
extremist discourse against Islam and Muslims and
ensure the comprehensive development of all nations.
Most importantly, we should seek to ensure the active
participation ofwomen in all ofthese efforts and refrain
from controlling their religious and cultural choices.

The advancement of women has been a priority
for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We are focused on
women's education at all levels, which helps to ensure
their access to the private and public sectors. Women
in Saudi Arabia have proven themselves. They have
been able to become members of the Shura Council and
have participated in municipal elections as candidates
and voters. They have become diplomats and occupy
a number of leadership positions. Women have also
been a focus of our development efforts, including the
2030 Vision of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which the
Kingdom launched in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

The achievements of Saudi women have been
many, and I cannot enumerate them all. They have
made great inroads in the fields of science, technology,
medicine, business, humanitarian action, pilgrim
services and other scientific, social and economic
activities. All of these achievements are the results of
our arduous efforts and of the attention we accord to
women's empowerment.

I note that this success has not happened in a
vacuum. Women have played a pioneering role in
Muslim and Arab history. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia is making great strides in order to ensure the
advancement of women and their empowerment, based
on our belief that addressing the root causes of women's
exclusion and marginalization is our religious, national
and development duty.

Thanks to the courageous and wise leadership ofmy
country, women in Saudi Arabia are allowed to dream.
We promise that the next stage will allow women to take
part in all walks of life. This is based on the principles
of moderate Islam, which has given women the status
they deserve and guarantees their dignity and rights,
far removed from extremist discourse that has nothing
to do with our principles or our way of life.

Our achievements are many, but we still have a long
way to go. Saudi women have been a model of patience,
dedication and devotion. Today, women in Saudi Arabia
are allowed to dream and to lead in favour of peace,
security and well-being, not only in the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the region but also throughout the
world. These are not empty promises. They are part
of an action plan that my country has launched and is
determined to see through to the end.

