Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First of all, let me thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate and
for the excellent concept note (S/2015/32, annex) that
you, Sir, circulated. We have listened carefully to our
briefers: Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Ms. Helen Durham
and Ms. Ilwad Elman. I thank them for sharing their
insights on the important topic that is the subject of this
debate.

Situations of conflict affect civilians in a
disproportionate manner. For reasons linked to their
gender and other social factors, they affect women and
girls even more. In these situations, women and girls
face sexual violence, sexual enslavement, trafficking
and other forms of exploitation. The relatively high
occurrence of female-headed households, where
women are forced to take on non-traditional roles, is
another dimension of the problem faced by women in
conflict situations.

Therefore, while protecting civilians in conflict
situations poses a great challenge, protecting women
and girls is an even greater challenge. For this reason,
it is vital that the protection of women and girls in
conflict situations receive special attention, and we
thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to
organize today's debate.

The Security Council, through its women and peace
and security agenda, has shown a firm commitment
to the protection of women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Resolutions 1325 (2000), 1960
(2010) and 2122 (2013) are a clear demonstration of
this commitment. With these frameworks in place, the
Security Council now has the tools to promote greater
protection for women in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

We cannot fail to notice the nexus between the
ready availability and proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and conflict, which must be effectively
addressed by the Security Council. The ratification and
faithful implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty must
be a step in that direction.

Regional organizations have an important role to
play in preventing and responding to conflict-related
violence. In this regard, we acknowledge the efforts

of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
in appointing a Special Envoy for Women, Peace and
Security, whose mandate includes the protection of
women and children in conflict situations and facilitating
the participation of women in peace processes. The
African Union (AU) also has cooperation framework
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
framework aims to develop a joint strategy to eradicate
conflict-related sexual violence through various
measures, including the enhancement of the capacity
of peacekeepers deployed in Africa to prevent and
respond to sexual violence. We would like to see this
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
further strengthened.

Nigeria is pleased with the AU declaration of2015 as
the Year of Women's Empowerment and Development.
While much has been achieved in Africa in terms of
promoting gender-equality and women's empowerment,
considerable challenges remain. It is our hope that the
AU declaration will encourage AU member States, civil
society, international partners and other stakeholders to
work together to promote the cause of women and girls.

Nigeria would like to acknowledge the Vital role
of civil society and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) in drawing attention to the gender dimensions of
armed conflict and in promoting women's participation
in peacemaking. The involvement of NGOs, especially
those run by women, in policy advocacy, seminars,
workshops, training programmes and other activities
undertaken on behalf of women, has gone a long way in
raising the profile of the women and peace and security
agenda. We commend in particular the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security for its leadership
role in promoting the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and for its close engagement with the United
Nations on matters pertaining to women and peace and
security.

While we acknowledge that States bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of their citizens, the
reality is that most conflicts occur in an atmosphere
of lawlessness where the activities of non-State actors,
including extremist groups, terrorists and criminal
networks, present a major challenge in the protection of
civilians. Such groups usually act with total disregard
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
In some situations, the complexity of the conflict has
forced aid agencies to negotiate with multiple warring
factions for safe passage for humanitarian personnel
and relief materials. That invariably makes it hard to
reach refugees and internally displaced persons in need
of assistance. In such situations, women and girls are
often the ones who suffer the most. Nigeria demands that
parties to conflict respect international humanitarian
law and stop impeding humanitarian assistance.

Finally, the protection of women and girls in conflict
and post-conflict situations is a multidimensional
challenge that requires concerted action by multiple
stakeholders on several fronts. Nigeria believes that the
United Nations, through the Security Council and other
relevant entities, is well positioned to take the lead in
meeting the challenge.

