Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to say that I am delighted that this open
debate is being held. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your Foreign Secretary, as well as
the representatives of the various countries here today.
I also welcome the participation of the Secretary-
General, and I am grateful for the statements made by
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Ms. Angelina Jolie and Ms. Jane
Adong Anywar.
I would like here to mention the feminist movement,
to pay tribute to it and to the thousands of women who
risk their lives on a daily basis to defend women's
human rights and put an end to impunity.

I would like to recall here the principles of the
United Nations initiative to combat sexual violence
against women in conflict situations. Rape is not
an inevitable consequence of war. Gender violence,
including sexual violence, is a violation of women's
dignity and fundamental human rights. Attempts to
halt and respond to sexual violence must address gender
inequalities and contribute to women's empowerment.
Women are often leaders in the process of eliminating
sexual violence and ensuring peace; the constructive
participation of men and boys in it is Vital to the
prevention of sexual violence in conflict situations. Best
practices against sexual violence must be strengthened.
Sexual violence in conflict situations and impunity for
those who commit such crimes have been met with a
deafening silence. We all have a duty to act.

We know that during the course of history the
definition of human rights and recognition of their
universality did not evolve at the same time. Only
a little more than 20 years ago, and at several world
summits, was a definition developed - not without
resistance and friction - of women's rights as human
rights. Only recently, in 1993, was the legal existence of
women as subjects of law recognized.

It was at the World Conference on Human Rights,
held in Vienna in 1993, that it was recognized that the
rights of women and the girl child are an inalienable
part of universal human rights. It was stated there that
the situation of women in the world must be analysed
from the gender perspective in order to ensure that
the universality of human rights shall encompass the
specific situations that prevent us, as women, from
fully exercising our human rights.

Six years later, the focus on the human rights
approach and the gender perspective was to imbue the
most important instrument of international criminal
law: the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court.

Based on that significant progress, violence against
women is now recognized as a human rights violation
in that it flouts a series of rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the right to life; the right not to
be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment; the right to equality before the law; the right
to equality in the family; and the right to the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health, inter
alia.
Part of the process of recognizing that violence
against women is a violation of human rights involves
stepping back from views that hold that violence
against women represents a kind of cultural expression
or is the unquestionable prerogative of specific groups
or individuals in the context of the exercise of power.

We know that Violence against women is woven
into the social fabric and pervades not only judicial
systems but also the way in which we see the world and
relationships between human beings in time of peace
and in time of armed conflict.

In armed conflict, then, appalling violence against
women, mass rape, abduction and sexual slavery must
not be regarded as exceptions but, rather, as a savage
extension of the daily Violence against women. Indeed,
violence against women is not a horrifying exception;
it is, rather, a continuum of violence. Thus, we note
that perhaps because of this, although such violence is
repugnant and illegal, it is in cases of sexual violence
that we see the lowest level of protection and the highest
rate of failure on the part of States to implement their
unshirkable responsibility to respect and guarantee the
human rights of women.

Such vulnerability is particularly acute in the
field of criminal procedural law, where a perverse
cycle of victimization of women occurs. In cases of
sexual violence, victims are routinely interrogated
about their participation in the crime; they are exposed
to unacceptable standards of proof; their lives are
investigated and assessed; their testimony is minimized
or rejected; and their claims are silenced. Today, gender
discrimination has reached the level ofjuris et de jure
presumptions of law, with real and discriminatory
effects.

In the context of armed conflict, violence against
women has particular significance. The worst crimes
are committed in times of war, which exacerbates
the inequality of women. Thus rape is a message of
castration and mutilation of the enemy, a battle fought
among men but carried out on the bodies of women.

We all know that one of the elements used to
legitimize such acts has been the concept of the sexual
honour of women as being the basis of male honour.
Hence sexual violence against women, sexual slavery
and forced pregnancy become acts that are justifiable in
time of armed conflict, on the basis ofthe argument that
they meet the needs of men. Faced with this horrifying
reality, we as women are throughout the world turning
our sorrow into strength to demand that our human
rights be respected and that an end be put to impunity.

As we move along the road to equality, a key
milestone has been the entry into force of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. There,
for the first time, it was recognized in the framework
of international humanitarian law that rape and other
forms of sexual and gender violence are crimes as
serious as genocide, torture, cruel treatment, mutilation
and slavery.

That was also a turning point in the context of
impunity - against impunity in law, which has its
origins in norms such as amnesties, and impunity in
act, which runs the gamut from complicity on the part
of public power, to the passivity of investigators, to
selectivity or corruption on the part of the judiciary.

Those important advances are without a doubt the
result of the jurisprudence of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia, the statements condemning sexual violence
against women made at Beijing and Vienna, and the
active participation of the women's movement.

Those beliefs are reflected in my country's decision
to combat impunity by exercising the unshirkable duty
of States to fight impunity. We have done this not only
with respect to criminal prosecution for the crimes
against humanity committed by the civil-military
dictatorship, using State terrorism, with 413 people
already found guilty.

We also recently signed the Arms Trade Treaty,
after having worked together with many present
here, fighting hard to ensure that for the first time
the link between the international arms trade and
gender Violence could be recognized. The President
of my country has signed a decree regarding the
implementation of our national plan of action on
resolution 1325 (2000) and complementary measures.
Men and women participating in peacekeeping missions
are given training on gender perspectives and human
rights. The strengthening of gender focal points in Blue
Helmets is also a priority.

In the negotiations leading to the adoption today
of resolution 2106 (2013), we held intensive discussions
on the tensions that may occur between the protection
of human rights and the principle of State sovereignty,
both fundamental pillars of the system of international
relations arising from the Charter of our Organization.

However, just as human rights cannot be degraded
to be used as a Trojan horse for foreign interventionism
in the domestic affairs of a country, neither can
sovereignty be invoked to cast a veil over serious
human rights violations or to protect from impunity in a
particular location. Argentina thus voted in favour ofthe
resolution, in the belief that it respects the sovereignty
of States and protects human rights, particularly those
of women. As our dear friend Zainab Bangura has said,
eradicating sexual violence in armed conflict is not a
mission impossible.

