Mr. De Croo (Belgium): I wish to thank the briefers
in today's debate, namely, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Bangoura and Ms. Allamin of
Nigeria, who spoke on behalf of civil society.

I am honoured to speak here today about a subject
of the utmost importance for my country, Belgium. I
align myself with the statement to be delivered later on
behalf of the European Union.

A few weeks ago, I was shocked by the testimony
of a young Yazidi girl who had been held captive by
Daesh in the north of Syria. The girl explained how she
had been abused several times a day, and how several
other girls killed themselves in despair of their hopeless
situation. That is one more cruel illustration of how
sexual violence is not only used as a weapon of war, but
also constitutes a tactic of terror. Therefore, as rightly
suggested by the recommendations of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203), efforts to
prevent and address sexual Violence must also closely
be aligned with efforts to prevent violent extremism.

Just last month, I visited the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In Goma I was approached by survivors
of sexual Violence. Women testified about how they
had been raped by soldiers, by rebels and even by camp
guards when they dared to leave the camp to look for
the charcoal they needed to cook and to survive. These
women were desperate. They asked us for safety and
shelter. We have to respond. That is why I am here
today.
According to Dr. Mukwege, who for many years
has been caring for survivors of sexual violence at
the Panzi Hospital in Bukavu, South Kivu, a recent
development is the rise of sexual violence perpetrated
by civilians. One explanation for this development
is that, through disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes, former child soldiers have
indeed been reintegrated, but owing to insufficient
vetting and psychological follow-up, they perpetuate a
culture of violence, including sexual violence, within
their communities. That leads to the continuation of
structural gender-based Violence, with a multiplicity of
consequences, not only for the individual but also for
the community and the society as a whole.

In that regard, Belgium welcomes the decision
by the Congolese authorities to prosecute high-
ranking Congolese army officers suspected of crimes
of sexual violence and to offer reparations to a
number of survivors. The appointment of a personal
representative of the President on sexual violence and
child recruitment, Ms. Mabunda, is an important sign of
hope. I look forward to her statement later this morning.
The action plan against sexual violence for the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC) and the creation of a monitoring committee
for the FARDC are indeed very important steps.

Belgium will support United Nations action to
fight impunity in Mali, where a comprehensive national
strategy to combat sexual and gender-based violence
will be drafted. There too, the improvement of the rule
of law and ofjustice mechanisms will be key.

We will also need more efforts for prevention and
the participation of women. Women must be part of the
solution. We welcome the Algiers peace process for

Mali, but we believe that an opportunity may have been
missed in terms of including women in the negotiations
and giving them a role in the implementation of a future
final agreement. Fifteen years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Council must be vigilant that
women and women's organizations are fully integrated
into such peace negotiations.

On behalf of my country, I would like to take
this opportunity to thank Ms. Bangura for her work,
dedication and the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General she presented. I hope the Council
will take into account the recommendations set out in
the report. The issue of conflict-related sexual Violence
must be fully integrated into the work of the relevant
Security Council sanctions committees as part of the
designation criteria for the imposition of targeted
measures.
Belgium welcomes the ongoing work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which focuses its efforts on strengthening
the capacity of national rule of law and justice actors.
We encourage countries to draw upon their expertise
to strengthen their capacity to address impunity for
conflict-related sexual violence.

In conclusion, I wish to encourage the Security
Council to keep the fight against conflict-related
sexual violence high on its agenda and to take action
accordingly. Sexual violence as a weapon of war, often
used against the most vulnerable, remains a stain on the
conscience of the international community. If we want
to uphold our common humanity, it is our duty to end
all forms of conflict-related sexual Violence.

