Mr. Valle (Brazil): Brazil welcomes the initiative
of the Romanian presidency to convene this open
debate on women and peace and security. This is a
proper and timely occasion to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), five years
after the adoption of a text of great significance. We
join other delegations in expressing our appreciation to
the distinguished speakers for their presentations.

The importance of the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is outlined in
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/ 1). We
need to continue to persevere in our efforts to empower
women in the various branches of United Nations
peace and security activities, from conflict prevention
to post-conflict reconstruction.

Over the past quinquennium, the Council has
dealt with gender issues, not only in its periodic
thematic debates, but also in tackling country-specific
situations. Progress has been made in integrating
gender perspectives into peacekeeping operations, with
concrete implications for the system.

While acknowledging the essential contributions
made by women as peacemakers and peacebuilders in
many settings, we are confronted with the reality of
under-representation of women in peace processes as a
whole. We must, therefore, promote change in order to
ensure full-fledged, or at least an increased rate, of
female participation in decision-making, not only in
ceasefire negotiations, but also in transitional
processes.

The special needs of women and girls should be
addressed in actions such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. With regard to
transitional justice, the United Nations can work
closely with national authorities in establishing
programmes aimed at ensuring accountability of
perpetrators of human rights violations, including
gender-based violence.

In this respect, it is deeply regrettable that women
continue to suffer serious impacts in conflicts. The
despicable and recurrent practice of gender-based
violence, especially rape and other forms of sexual
abuse, is one of the worst challenges we face in terms
of protection.

The issue of sexual abuse and exploitation by all
categories of personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping missions is also disturbing. We must
condemn, in the strongest terms, all acts of sexual
misconduct and fully implement codes of conduct and
disciplinary procedures in order to prevent such acts
from happening again and to ensure full accountability.
We support the measures undertaken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on this issue.
To face these and other gender challenges to peace and
security, comprehensive strategies must be pursued,
and concrete targets must be met.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-
General for submitting to the Council an action plan
(S/2005/636) aimed at implementing resolution 1325
(2000) across the United Nations system. Initiatives to
expand training, not only for women's organizations,
but also for peacekeeping personnel and capacity-
building, could certainly be intensified. We also
recognize the importance of identifying women
candidates for senior and decision-making positions,
including special representatives and envoys, with due
regard to equitable geographical distribution. The
Secretary-General's report also mentions that it is
necessary to increase financial support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including
through extra-budgetary resources.

In addition, the contribution of civil society,
especially women's organizations, is fundamental in
this process. Apart from the engagement with civil
society at the national and regional levels, there have
been increased informal exchanges between the
Council and civil society organizations. In this respect,
we thank Denmark for having organized an Arria
Formula meeting that helped to prepare this discussion.

As for intergovernmental oversight, one cannot
disregard the possibility of cooperation between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council, under article 65 of the Charter. The
Peacebuilding Commission can contribute to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and it will
benefit from women's skills and perspectives in
peacebuilding processes.

Finally, the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security report, entitled "From Local to
Global: Making Peace Work for Women", notes that
when women are excluded from peace negotiations and
peacekeeping initiatives, peace will definitely not work
for women.

The Security Council needs to ensure that gender
concerns continue to be included in new peacekeeping
mandates. In doing so, we will strengthen our
commitment to gender mainstreaming, and we once
again reaffirm the fundamental role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding.

