Ms. Atanackovic' (Serbia): I address the Council
today on behalf of the Deputy Prime Minister of
Serbia, Mrs. Zorana Mihajlovie, who is also Minister
for Construction.

Before I proceed with my statement, I would like
to express my profound condolences to the Government
and people of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka for the tragedy caused by the terror attacks on
Easter Sunday. We condemn those despicable acts in
the strongest terms.

Serbia strongly supports activities aimed at
preventing all forms of violence, including sexual
violence, in armed conflicts. Considering that issue
at the United Nations, with full cooperation by all
relevant actors - States, international organizations
and civil society - is a prerequisite for a wider, more
efficient and effective engagement. The first steps in
that direction were made with the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). Serbia supports the efforts of the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and other United
Nations mechanisms created to further those goals. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) today.

Recognizing the importance of global efforts to
combat sexual violence in conflict, Serbia endorsed the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict proposed by the United Kingdom in a meeting
held on the margins of the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly in September 2013. On the basis
of resolution 1325 (2000), Serbia adopted a national
action plan for its implementation for the period 2017-
2020. After all, our common goal at the global level
cannot be achieved without adequate measures at the
national level. Those national measures are aimed, inter
alia, at establishing an effective prevention system and
punishing perpetrators.

Serbia is a State party to the Rome Statute and
supports the efforts of the International Criminal Court
to prosecute crimes of sexual violence in conflict.
Serbia also fully cooperated with the Hague Tribunal in
the prosecution of crimes of sexual violence in conflict
in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, while the
Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of
Serbia is charged with the prosecution of such crimes at
the national level.

There is no doubt that each and every crime deserves
punishment. That is true ofthe crimes committed during
armed conflict, as well as ofthe crimes committed in the
aftermath of conflict, when the vulnerability of certain
categories of persons - such as women, children and
the elderly - is patently evident. The stigma, as well
as the profound psychological consequences, are felt
long after the occurrence of such crimes and victims
avoid speaking about their suffering for many years.
Serbia supports a victim-centred approach aimed at
providing comprehensive medical, psychological, legal
and socioeconomic assistance.

Encouraging victims of sexual violence to report
the crime is the first step towards investigating and
punishing perpetrators, as well as in efforts to prevent
those crimes. It is therefore important to ensure that
victims have an opportunity to report cases of sexual
violence both during and after conflict. Serbia is
committed to establishing a system of prevention
through the inclusion of the gender dimension in its
national security forces, as well as its international
peacekeeping missions.

One victim of such violence is one too many and
each victim is entitled to have access to justice. At the
same time, speculating on the numbers of victims and
insisting on a hierarchy of victims according to ethnic,
religious and other affiliations, or indeed by the gender
of the victim, often leads to politicization and does not
contribute to the achievement of reconciliation in post-
conflict societies.

Witness protection is of particular importance
for determining accountability and for punishing
perpetrators. In the absence of written documents,
the most important sources of evidence are witness
testimonies. Governments, therefore, as well as other
international institutions involved in the prosecution of
those crimes, must provide adequate witness protection,
including exclusion of the public from the process and
the protection of witness and victim identities.

The international community should support
countries through various programmes to strengthen
existing institutions and help establish new institutions,
including ad hoc tribunals for violence of any kind,
especially sexual violence, in conflict areas. Other
relevant measures include mediation training and
conflict negotiations at local and national levels. All
parties involved in armed conflict should provide for
the necessary measures; after all, it is never too late
to punish perpetrators and achieve the justice that
victims deserve.

Once again, I would like, on behalf of Serbia,
to thank all Council members for their continued
dedication to this issue.

