Mr. Joyini (South Africa): My delegation wishes to
express its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
statement, as well as to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women, for her insightful
contributions, and to Ms. Yanar Mohammed, President
of the Organization of Women's Freedom in Iraq.

This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), which drew attention to
the effects of armed conflict on women and girls.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was highly
significant because it gave impetus to South Africa's
international commitments to gender equality. That
resolution was the first to provide women with the
space to participate and voice their opinion on peace
and security issues.

Our own history has taught us about the influential
role that women can play in a post-conflict setting.
South African women represent a commanding
constituency and have been at the forefront of driving
reform, developing and advancing responsive policies
and legislation across all sectors of Government
and the private sector. Today, at the level of political
decision-making, 42 per cent of South Africa's
representatives in Parliament are women.

South Africa is also encouraged by the progress
made at the African Union (AU) level and the
commitment made there to gender mainstreaming, and
we further commend the development and adoption of
the AU Gender Training Manual for AU Peace Support
Operations. There is no doubt that the empowerment of
women will have a long, lasting and positive impact on
the overall protection of vulnerable groups affected by
conflicts. Allow me to outline five core areas that my
delegation views as priorities.

First, my delegation reaffirms its commitment
to the full and effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the subsequent related resolutions
as the building blocks for advancing the women and
peace and security agenda. We would like to encourage
the strengthening of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), given the complex and dynamic nature
of conflict, which has changed the character of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding practices.

Secondly, at the heart of the principles of resolution
1325 (2000) is the need to address sexual violence in
conflict, which is an integral aspect ofthe overall women
and peace and security agenda. Member States have the
primary responsibility to put an end to impunity and
to prosecute perpetrators responsible for crimes against
humanity and war crimes, including those relating to
sexual violence against women and girls. South Africa
appreciates the active role and full participation by
the Executive Director of UN-Women and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict in monitoring implementation. As
stated before, my delegation would like to encourage
the Security Council to develop a broader framework
of prevention, for example by explicitly referencing
sexual violence in conflict in all relevant country-
specific resolutions.

Thirdly, access to justice for women in conflict
and post-conflict settings through conscious policies
is essential to the building of fair, equitable and equal
societies. Women suffer disproportionately from
poverty, and the risks that they face are heightened in
armed conflict and post-conflict settings. The legal
framework to address issues of discrimination against
women with respect to land ownership and other fields
should be strengthened in line with the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. Access to development, economic opportunity,
employment, education and health care is an essential
component of gender-responsive peacebuilding.

Fourthly, it is also important to emphasize that
women should be involved in every phase of the peace
and security agenda, including being provided with
a greater role in preventive diplomacy, formal peace
processes and mediation. We believe that promoting
the role of women in the mediation of conflict will
strengthen the potential to find sustainable solutions to
conflict that cover a wider range of interests, especially
those of women and children, whose interests are not
sufficiently reflected in outcomes. We therefore support
the inclusion of a clear component stressing women's
participation in the terms of reference of mediation and
peacebuilding processes.

My fifth and last point is that good practices,
challenges and lessons learned must be documented by
all stakeholders. It is also of critical importance to secure
State-level and political buy-in and commitment in the
form of financial and human resources. The collection
of statistics and data is pertinent to developing policies
that are inclusive of women and responsive to women's
needs. That will, no doubt, ensure contributions
to the already existing monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms with regard to resolution 1325 (2000). A
mentoring and coaching mechanism for women must
also be established as a support mechanism. Mentoring
is critical in sharing experiences and therefore ensures
that new recruits mature in the process.

While there is value in developing monitoring
mechanisms for the Security Council to ensure the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) and other relevant resolutions, the greater
participation of women in negotiation and peacemaking
processes will allow for the greater incorporation
of gender perspectives and the concerns of women,
thereby contributing to the sustainability of peace and
security efforts.

