Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to express
Brazil's deepest concern and repudiation with regard to
sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Misconduct by those who are
expected to bring peace and justice to countries
emerging from conflict and civil strife cannot be
tolerated under any circumstances. This is a highly
sensitive issue that United Nations Member States
themselves must address urgently and in a
comprehensive manner in the proper forum. At the
same time, my delegation would like to express its
deep appreciation to the great majority of members of
peacekeeping missions who carry out their duties in a
way that properly reflects the noble aims of the United
Nations and its peacekeeping operations.

It is well known that the General Assembly is the
only organ with universal representation that has

competence to make recommendations with regard to
general principles of cooperation in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We believe it
inappropriate for the Security Council to engage in
actual lawmaking.

Brazil attaches great importance to the issue of
sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We believe that measures
have to be taken before, during and after deployment.
In our view, the United Nations could play a more
active role in the training of troops, even before
deployment. Prevention, a solid doctrine and
comprehensive training are essential in order to avoid
sexual misconduct.

On the ground, instructions should always be
clear, so that peacekeepers are made well aware of the
kind of behaviour that is expected from them and of
the consequences of their acts. We stress the need to
consolidate a precise set of rules and an effective
mechanism for proper investigation and punishment, as
well as to maintain the availability of an efficient
reporting channel. The three available documents
related to the rules of conduct for peacekeepers,
valuable as they are, overlap in many respects and do
not bring enough clarity to the issue. Therefore, it
seems appropriate to establish a set of binding rules
that are clear, concise and consistent.

Brazil shares the View that the incorporation of
standards of conduct for peacekeepers into a
memorandum of understanding is a positive step,
provided that troop-contributing countries retain
exclusive jurisdiction over their contingents. We must
bear in mind, however, that a memorandum of
understanding is an instrument that binds only the two
or more parties directly involved in its subscription. In
view of that, it would be appropriate for the discussion
and eventual adoption of a model memorandum of
understanding to be accompanied by other measures by
the General Assembly, including the adoption of
relevant resolutions and the addition of legal
documents. The Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations should continue to discuss and urgently
adopt a comprehensive and coherent strategy for
preventing sexual exploitation and abuse.

It is important to implement the decisions taken
earlier in 2005 by the General Assembly on this issue,
on the basis of the discussions held in the Special
Committee concerning the report released by the
Secretary-General containing the recommendations of
his Special Adviser on the matter, Prince Zeid Ra'ad
Zeid Al-Hussein. Every senior authority in
peacekeeping missions must be ready to take action in
the event of allegations related to sexual exploitation
and abuse.

In the case of military personnel, commanders
must make a firm commitment to act in a decisive
manner whenever there are indications of abuse on the
part of their troops. Investigations should be impartial
and should respect the principle of due process of law
so that alleged offenders can have the chance to present
their side of the case. In those cases in which judicial
proceedings become necessary, the alleged offenders
should be immediately repatriated to their countries of
origin to face proceedings. The outcome of the exercise
should enhance the cooperation between the United
Nations and the relevant national authorities in the
fight against sexual crimes.

Those considerations should be applied mutatis
mutandis to the three components of peacekeeping
operations, namely, civilian, military and police
personnel. It is not appropriate for each of those
components to follow a substantively different set of
rules on the same issue.

