Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): At the outset,
let me, like other speakers, thank the British presidency
for this debate on an important and complex topic.

In view the importance that Aruba, one of the
four countries in our kingdom, attaches to the fight
against human trafficking and modern slavery, let me
acknowledge the presence in my delegation of Minister
Hooyboer-Winklaar, Minister for Education and Family
Policy in the Government of Aruba and Head of the
Delegation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the
Commission on the Status of Women.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union, we support the statement made by the
representative of Italy, also in the context of our split
term in the Security Council in 2017 and 2018.
There is an obvious need for the Council to
address the issue of human trafficking in conflict, as
it clearly undermines international peace and security.
I shall focus on three issues in that regard: prevention,
protection and prosecution. Let me startwith prevention.

National responsibility and international
cooperation are key to an effective preventive approach
to human trafficking. This requires at least three
things. First of all, we need more in-depth analysis
and greater information-sharing to understand how
criminal networks operate, because terrorist groups
are increasingly engaged in human trafficking and
the smuggling of people. To this end, the Netherlands
promotes international cooperation between financial
intelligence units.

Secondly, we need to step up our joint effort to
combat the current criminal networks involved in
human trafficking, for example in the area of border
security. As co-Chair, together with Morocco, of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, the Netherlands is
committed to placing this topic high on the agenda
because greater border security also addresses cross-
border human trafficking in conflict areas.

Thirdly, we believe that we should increase our
vigilance. In order to strengthen the implementation
of our anti-trafficking legislation and policy, in 2000
the Netherlands appointed an independent national
rapporteur on trafficking in human beings with that
objective especially in mind.

That brings me to my second issue, that of
protection during conflict. Here, one specific area of
focus should be the protection against human traffickers
of vulnerable groups among refugees and internally
displaced persons, especially women and children. One
way to do so is by increasing the resilience of displaced
persons and host communities alike. Also from that
perspective, the Netherlands supports education,
economic development and employment for displaced
persons and host communities in the wider Syrian
region and the Horn of Africa. In addition, countries
should ensure that proper care is available for victims
of human trafficking, including safe shelter and medical
and psychological care.

Let me finally move to my third issue, prosecution
after conflict. In view of the enormous human suffering
traffickers cause, their impunity is simply intolerable.
Together, we should join forces to investigate and hold
traffickers accountable. This requires strengthening
legal frameworks at the national level. These frameworks
must of course be in line with international standards.
The international community should continue to assist
countries that lack the capacities to do so.

Capacity-building is also crucial when it comes to
training national law enforcement agencies, prosecutors
and lawyers. In that regard, let me commend the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for all the capacity-
building it is doing worldwide to end impunity for
human traffickers.

In conclusion, under the Spanish presidency the
Council unanimously adopted resolutions 2331 (2016),
on human trafficking in conflict. The importance of
implementing the resolution and other international
conventions cannot be overestimated. Together, we
should redouble our efforts to cooperate to prevent
human trafficking, protect victims and prosecute
perpetrators. The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands
ready to continue to be a partner in this endeavour.

