Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I welcome the Security Council presidency
of the United Kingdom and thank it for having
convened this open debate and for the presidential note
(S/PRST/2015/25), which deals with what is perhaps
one of the most tragic topics: the trafficking of persons
in armed conflicts.

The statements we have heard this morning paint
a picture of the horror that millions of people suffer
due to trafficking ofpersons in armed conflicts and the
challenges that the international community confronts
in effectively addressing that phenomenon, which
especially afflicts women and children. The trafficking
of persons is the slavery of our times. It is not only
an abomination of the past; millions of people today
live in conditions of slavery. Most trafficking victims
are vulnerable women and children, almost always
tricked or abducted and forced to live a life of suffering,
exploitation, torture or servitude. That cruel practice
has become a global industry, and it must be decisively
combated by all.

In September 2015, through the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, Member States committed
to adopting measures relating to the trafficking of
persons. As the Secretary-General himself expressed
in his statement this morning, the Agenda is a valuable
tool for all States, in keeping with our commitments, to
contribute to the eradication of that scourge.

The figures are disheartening, and Colombia is no
stranger to this issue. That is why I wish to reiterate
the unswerving commitment of the Government to the
fight against that phenomenon, which has a nature and
effects that lead to human rights abuses. Consequently,
we believe it is essential for our efforts to be able to
bolster countries' capabilities to more comprehensively
combat this kind of crime.

Between 2012 and 2016, the Government of
Colombia assisted 199 citizens who were victims of
human trafficking, and in 2016 alone, we provided
immediate assistance to 37 victims of reported cases of
human trafficking. Similarly, in 2016 there were 28,052
undocumented - and often exploited - migrants in
Colombia, most coming from countries of our region
and other parts of the world that use this transit route to
countries in the North.

That is why, among other legal and governmental
measures, we joined the initiative of the Global Action
to Prevent and Address Trafficking in Persons and the
Smuggling of Migrants, which the Government will
support with a view to assisting and protecting victims
and vulnerable people, as well as advancing prevention,
investigation and prosecution efforts.
Echoing the appeals of the Secretary-General and
the President this morning, only together can we tackle
this scourge and in that way seek to free our countries
from the transnational organized crime that profits
from it.

