Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Much has been done in the four years since
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted. We are grateful to
the Under-Secretary-General, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Population Fund for their statements
reviewing accomplishments over the past four years
and describing the basic priorities for the future
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We are pleased to see that the issues before us
today are being given increasing attention not only by
the Security Council, but also by the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and its
functional commissions, particularly the Commission
on the Status of Women. Progress has been made on
enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of steps
taken in that area, taking account of changing trends
and, accordingly, the new conditions for introducing
gender issues into all aspects of United Nations
activities within existing resources.

Despite the very intensive focus on those issues,
however, we must acknowledge that considerable
efforts still need to be made to overcome their negative
repercussions. As to specific action in that respect, we
are pleased to refer to the report of the Secretary-
General in document S/2004/814, which describes in
detail the steps taken to implement resolution 1325
(2000). Most importantly, it contains useful
recommendations that will certainly require quite some
time to study thoroughly.

Unfortunately, many recommendations remain
stuck on the paper on which they are written, while
others have been only partially implemented. We
therefore welcome the Secretary-General's initiative to
prepare a comprehensive system-wide strategy and
plan of action to enable us to focus the work of the
Organization in that respect. It is most important here
to avoid overly generalized and stereotyped
conclusions and recommendations. The preparation of
comprehensive and all-inclusive approaches must not
hinder the search for solutions to specific problems in
any given situation. A good example in that respect
could be the drafting of guidelines to increase
awareness of the needs of women in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.

We are convinced that women can play an
important role in conflict prevention and settlement
and we endorse the Secretary-General's intention to
develop strategies to ensure the equal participation of
women in peace negotiations and election processes. In
the context of post-conflict recovery, we support the
appeal for broader recourse to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women as a benchmark document.

Much remains to be done to ensure that
systematic account is taken of the gender perspective
in planning, implementation, monitoring and
accountability. It is important, however, that the
inclusion of the gender perspective in work on the
ground be not merely declaratory, but that it yield
genuine results in protecting and improving the
situation of women and girls in conflicts and post-
conflict societies.
In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm our belief
that the issues of combating manifestations of
discrimination and violence against women, the
situation of women in conflict, and their participation
in peacekeeping and post-conflict settlement will be
considered as a whole and remain on the agendas not
only of the Security Council, but also of the most
important global and regional international forums.

