Mrs. Gilmutdinova (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank you, Madam President, for organizing
today's open debate devoted to issues related to
women's participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, Major General Kristin Lund, Head of Mission
of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization,
and Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their views.

We firmly believe in the substantial positive
potential of women's participation in various aspects
of the settlement of armed conflicts and peacebuilding,
including within the framework of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We would like to point out
that since the Security Council's adoption in 2000 of
resolution 1325 (2000), the first ofa series ofresolutions
on women and peace and security, the joint efforts of
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries have
been fostering a steady increase in the role and number
of women peacekeepers in the military and police
components ofUnited Nations peacekeeping operations.

We agree with the importance of ensuring equal
opportunities for women participating in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and of removing
structural barriers. At the same time, increasing the
number of women in field missions should not be an
end in itself. It is crucial that the process of involving
women in peacekeeping activities be conducted
thoughtfully, based on the actual requirements of a
specific presence on the ground. Professional qualities,
rather than artificial indicators aimed at achieving
a particular ratio of women to men, must also be
taken into account. In that respect, we would like to
caution against the excessive use of temporary special
measures to increase numbers of women peacekeepers,
since lowering the bar, for instance in the area of rank,
can also discriminate against men. What sort of gender
equality or equal opportunities can we talk about in
such circumstances? The specifics for each country's
presence also have to be taken into account, including
the security conditions for conducting operations.

It goes without saying that both women and men
bring their own particular advantages that should be
used rationally. For example, women peacekeepers may
be more effective in establishing contacts with the local
population, especially women and children, because
they elicit a greater sense of trust and protection. Such
efforts are needed when investigating cases of sexual
violence where the victims may be more open with
women peacekeepers. However, we must not forget that
peacekeeping is also related to military action and its
concomitant risks, particularly when it involves tasks
that require physical strength. In order to increase
women's involvement in peacekeeping, it is important
to create favourable conditions that take into account
their particular requirements. We know that at one
stage or another women are often forced to give up
peacekeeping work in order to deal with family concerns
and caring for children and relatives. This is generally
related to the impossibility of combining their work
and family life on the ground, and to the insecurity of
their environment. Such factors will have to be taken
into account in the Secretariat's future implementation
of its gender policy. It is also essential to comply with
the principle of fair geographical representation in
appointing women, including to leadership positions in
the Department of Peace Operations.

We should also remember that the primary
responsibility for increasing the number of women

in the military components of peacekeeping forces
belongs to States themselves. It is therefore important
to consider the opinions of the troop-contributing
countries themselves in this regard and each country's
national approach to staffing. The natural problems
that may arise in achieving one or another indicator
should not be a criterion for making decisions about the
deployment of particular contingents.

The Russian Federation has been providing
peacekeepers to United Nations peacekeeping
operations for more than 45 years. Our current
percentage of women is at least 17 per cent, and our
women peacekeepers are working in the United Nations
missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kosovo, South Sudan, Western Sahara and Cyprus. We
are pleased that they are highly rated for their service
in the various United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We also have a wealth of experience in training
peacekeepers, including women, at United Nations-
certified training centres, particularly the All-Russian
Institute for Advanced Training of Employees of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation
in Domodedovo, which has continued to train foreign
law-enforcement officers every year, with the broad
participation of women. We will continue to provide all
possible assistance to building the capacities of United
Nations peacekeeping.

