Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
commending you, Madam President, on convening
today's debate on the very important subject of sexual
violence in the context of armed conflict. Indonesia
also wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2014/181),
containing some valuable recommendations, the
implementation of which will strengthen the prevention
and elimination efforts against this deeply troubling
challenge.

Indonesia would also like to associate itselfwith the
statement delivered by the representative of Viet Nam
on behalf of the member countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.

While we applaud the evolvement of a global
normative framework on sexual violence in armed
conflict, not least through the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, resolution 1325 (2000) and
others, it is a tragic fact that citizens, particularly
women, in large numbers continue to be victimized in
conflicts. Being softer targets, women and children are
particularly exploited as tactics in combat, becoming
casualties too many times with impunity. With its
multifold health, social, cultural and economic impact,
armed-conflict-related sexual violence not only affects
the victims, but imposes long-lasting disarray on their
families, communities and societies at large.

As a country that places high priority on providing
conditions for its citizens in which they can live
freely without fear and develop, Indonesia strongly
believes that the first endeavour should be to build
a culture of peace and tolerance and prevent armed
conflict itself. For us, that means that the international
community should also put a greater premium on the
peaceful resolution of disputes while enhancing and
sustaining support particularly to those countries
that lack capacities and resources. But if the conflict
erupts, there must be full adherence to the international
humanitarian and human rights laws relating to
citizens, and all vulnerable groups, including women
and children, must be safeguarded effectively.

Indonesia stands for zero tolerance of sexual
violence against all citizens - women, children and
men - in armed conflict. To that end, the effort should
not be limited to focusing on improving the prosecution
and elimination of impunity against cases of sexual
violence in conflict. It has to be a comprehensive
undertaking with the United Nations system entities
playing a more active and supporting role, coupled with
an equally meaningful participation and cooperation by
all Member States. Foremost in that respect is upholding
the rule of law at both international and national levels.
I reiterate the significance of the United Nations role in
that regard.

Since the primary responsibility falls on the nation
State itself, there should be appropriate domestic law
enforcement and justice mechanisms dealing with
sexual violence in conflict with well-resourced and
equipped institutions that can provide the needed care.
There must be vigorous and continuous wholesome
measures to build an environment and infrastructure in
societies that strengthen the respect and protection of
women and human life under all conditions.

We believe that the development of the United
Nations civilian capacities initiative, along with the
advancement of other relevant United Nations and
non-United Nations programmes, can enable greater
capacity-building in the area of safeguarding women
and their rights in conflict-affected countries. While
taking such steps, it is also vital that women be seen not
just as victims, but also as peace enablers in conflict.
History has proven their credentials in creating peace.
The policies ofthe United Nations system and outside it
should therefore promote extensive measures to ensure
the greater participation of women at all stages from
conflict prevention to resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Indonesia supports not only a larger
number of women in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, but a larger number ofwomen in the leadership
of peacekeeping missions as well as related offices in
New York and elsewhere.

At this juncture, Indonesia has deployed female
peacekeepers in several missions, including the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and
it is committed to increasing the number of its female
peacekeepers. Our emphasis on preventing sexual
violence in conflict is also evident in our having an
adequate personnel capacity on the subject and in
our protection of civilians in implementing mission
mandates. We fully support the continuation of
mandatory training on addressing sexual violence for
all peacekeeping personnel. That is why the Indonesian
Peacekeeping Centre has included training on the
issue and will ensure the continuation of this exercise,
based on the standards and materials provided by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

In conclusion, I want to underline the importance of
the empowerment of women. Effective policies backed
by action to accord them their due rights and equal
opportunities will be critical to bolstering the overall
work on preventing sexual Violence against women and
other citizens in conflict.

