Ms. Adamson: I thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hyland, Ms. Elman and Mr. Fedotov for
their briefings.

I speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

We would like to congratulate the United Kingdom
for convening this open debate and to commend its
keen commitment to addressing the issue of trafficking
in human beings and forced labour in conflict during
its presidency of the Security Council. We have built
on the momentum generated by previous presidencies
to address this issue, and we look forward to the
continuous commitment of the international community
to addressing this scourge.

Trafficking in human beings is a grave violation or
abuse of human rights and a serious form of organized
crime. The prohibition on trafficking in human beings
and forced labour is expressly set forth in Article 5 of
the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union. Furthermore, in its new Global Strategy for
Foreign and Security Policy, the EU has recognized the
need to counter the spillover of insecurity that might
originate from conflicts, ranging from trafficking and
smuggling to terrorism.

We reiterate that we stand behind the commitments
in the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants
to combat human trafficking, including through targeted
measures to identify, protect and assist victims, as well
as to prevent human trafficking among those affected
by displacement, while taking into account the fact
that women and children are in particularly vulnerable
situations. We believe that it is important to strengthen
multilateral cooperation and partnerships, and, in
line with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), we
also need to engage more women and young people
in both peacebuilding activities and actions against
human trafficking.

We welcome the report (S/2106/949) submitted
by the Secretary-General in November 2016 on the
implementation of measures to counter trafficking in
persons. We note with attention the nexus between
conflict and trafficking in human beings, which can
take, in that context, many despicable forms. We
particularly note the links between conflict, trafficking
in human beings and other forms of crime. Trafficking
is gender-specific. The most recent EU data show
that trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation
continues to be the most widespread form encountered
by authorities, and the majority of its victims are
women and girls. Moreover, according to the same EU
data, trafficking for the purpose of labour exploitation
affects primarily men and boys. In that respect, we call
for a more gender-specific, targeted approach in all
actions against trafficking in human beings.

We recall the need to focus on the prevention
of trafficking in human beings in all its forms.
Any other approach comes too late for the victims
of that deplorable crime. In that respect, ensuring
accountability for the perpetrators is essential as a
deterrent. We must follow the financial trails and use
all the available investigative tools and techniques to
prosecute and bring to justice the perpetrators. By
upholding and promoting international standards, as
enshrined in the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, and
other international legal instruments, we contribute
to ensuring strong foundations for the rule of law. We
need to renew and invigorate our efforts to implement
the existing legal architecture.

The EU has built an ambitious, gender-specific,
child-sensitive and comprehensive legal and policy
framework to combat trafficking in human beings.
Anti-trafficking actions also form a key part of our
external policies and funding, and the EU continues to
cooperate with and support United Nations agencies.

We recognize that instability creates an ideal
environment for the criminal activities of traffickers.
We are therefore actively supporting all United
Nations-led efforts to end the political and security
crises in Syria and Libya. We are also prioritizing
activity in connection with counter-terrorism, working
with partners throughout the world to address threats
from all terrorist organizations, including those like
Da'esh and Boko Haram, which have clearly and quite
publicly exploited and trafficked women and girls for
their own objectives. We need to understand further the
links between terrorist organizations and the organized
criminal groups that carry out the trafficking of people
and other illicit commodities. We need to actively
pursue an agenda to increase women's participation in
peace processes and in encountering violent extremism
so as to ensure effective measures and solutions. We
must work together to do all we can to stop this multiple
scourge on our societies.
I have a much longer statement, but in the interest of
time I will stop here. The full version of our statement
has been distributed.

