Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully associates itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and would like add the
following remarks in a national capacity.

My delegation thanks the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka; the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, Mr. Chaloka Beyani; and the founder and
Director of Sadr City Women's Centre and Legal
Clinic, Ms. Suaad Allami, for their statements. My
delegation also thanks the Argentinian presidency for
having convened today's open debate.

Belgium welcomes the subject chosen for today's
debate, which remains of great relevance. As indicated
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/693),
the past year was marked by a series of troubling
developments and heinous crimes related to violent
conflicts, in many cases of a terrorist nature, resulting
in new mass displacements of populations. My country
is concerned about the persistence of sexual and gender-
based violence against women in conflicts. The violent
acts committed in Nigeria by Boko Haram and in Iraq
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant are further
evidence of a determination to deliberately target
women and girls, kidnap them, enslave them or even
sell them as slaves. It is an abhorrent development to
which we absolutely must find an appropriate response.

We know that the vast majority of displaced
persons are women and girls. Their specific needs
must therefore be recognized and taken into account
in situations of displacement and in refugee camps.
In times of conflict, it is often important to respond
quickly. It is all the more important, therefore, to
anticipate and provide for the specific contexts and
needs of women so as to ensure that those aspects are
not overlooked during emergency interventions.

To ensure the safety and protection of women and
girls in the framework of humanitarian work, it is
also important, first, to take into account the specific
requirements for the protection of women and girls in
the context not only of humanitarian assistance, but
also of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and security sector reform.

Secondly, we must ask humanitarian organizations
to make the security of women and girls a priority in the
organization and management of refugee camps. In that
regard, it is essential to improve the participation and
leadership of women in decision-making committees
and structures in refugee and displaced persons camps
so as, inter alia, to ensure that they can express and
highlight their concerns with regard to matters of
organization, health and safety.

Thirdly, we must accord the necessary priority
to financial support for women heads of households
in situations of displacement and in refugee camps,
because without income, their precarious situation puts
them at further risk.

