Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I hope to pay tribute to
Ambassador Cohen at a later date.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, as well as my brother Ambassador
Jerry Matjila for the excellent South African presidency.
I would also like to thank our sister Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed and Ambassador Fatima
Mohammed for their briefings.
We have witnessed historic changes to the
peace in the Horn of Africa, which has long been
ridden with complex internal strife and conflicts.
Rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea last year
triggered subsequent engagement between Eritrea,
Djibouti and Somalia, better positioning the region to
embrace friendship and cooperation. I recall that the
Secretary-General has aptly said that "there is a wind
of hope blowing in the Horn of Africa" and I am glad
to hear that from the statement of my sister Amina
Mohammed. She left those five countries with a sense
of hope and optimism, and that is where we should
start our discussion today. I would like to underline
several points.

The first concerns the primacy of peaceful solutions
to settle differences. We are fully aware of unresolved
bilateral issues and unhealed wounds, with the potential
to reignite tensions in the region. The international
community must continue to encourage countries
of the region to peacefully settle their outstanding
disputes, while also providing space for them to further
reconnect. Rapprochement in the Horn of Africa has
demonstrated the virtue of African solutions to African
problems. Dialogue is key to building confidence
and to narrowing the differences in ways to resolve
outstanding issues.

My second point concerns the need for a united
front against common security challenges. Countries
of the region are still facing many conflict-drivers,
including socioeconomic difficulties, marginalization
and weak governance. Terrorism remains one of the
largest security threats to the region. Caution is needed
to minimize the impact of conflicts in its proximity
and to protect safe passage across the Red Sea. The
United Nations has developed a comprehensive
regional prevention strategy for the Horn of Africa.
We look forward to seeing it support national efforts
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
prevention mandates.

Thirdly, economic cooperation holds the key to
a lasting peace. The Horn of Africa is strategically
located on one of the world's major shipping routes and
is blessed with vast natural resources. Countries of the
region are among Africa's fastest growing economies.
Rapprochement should be used to further economic
cooperation and intraregional trade, capitalizing on
the launch of the African Continental Free Trade
Area. Furthermore, it could underpin the attainment
of both the African Union Agenda 2063 and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. To this
end, Indonesia is committed to enhancing economic
and development cooperation with Africa, including
through capacity-building and the convening of the
Indonesia-Africa Forum and the Indonesia-Africa
Infrastructure Dialogue.

My fourth point relates to the imperative for
women's inclusive and meaningful participation. I
think we have heard quite a lot this morning and I am
pleased that the United Nations and African Union
solidarity mission to the Horn of Africa sent a clear
message on that particular issue. Women are powerful
agents of peace. Their participation in peace processes
is an important factor in its success. My delegation is
encouraged to hear of the commitment of the region's
leaders to reinforce women's contribution to politics
and peacebuilding. We acknowledge a record of 50 per
cent female membership in the Ethiopian Cabinet.

I would like to echo what the Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed said about paying tribute
to women peacekeepers. During my visit in Dubai, I
made contact with our Indonesian women peacekeepers
and other women peacekeepers in other missions and
the message I received was that we need to do more
on the issues of deployment kits, living quarters and
home leave because women also have obligations to
their families back at home. That is an issue that I
have been discussing over the last three years. In that
regard, I would like to ask a simple question to the
Deputy Secretary-General. What can we in the Council
do and what particular, concrete incentives could we
offer to enhance the number of women peacekeepers
in missions? We cannot continue making statements
without anything concrete to offer. The United Nations
system offers, for instance, the simple case of those
issues previously mentioned.

