Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I would also like
to thank the Ms. Ilwad Elman and the representatives
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their briefings.

The protection of civilians is a pressing priority for
the Government of Afghanistan. The Afghan people
have suffered for more than 30 years as a result of war
and conflict, and continue to suffer today. The past
year was the deadliest for civilians in Afghanistan
since 2001. The Taliban and other extremist armed
groups are responsible for the overwhelming majority
of civilian casualties in Afghanistan. They directly
target civilians with their brutal violent campaigns and
utter disregard for human life. They carry out heinous
acts of terror on mosques, markets, schools, homes
and critical infrastructure, and threaten communities
by planting improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and
launching suicide and complex attacks in public places.
They target men, women, children, clergy, tribal elders,
Government officials and justice-sector employees
alike. Let me be clear: attacks on civilians are a sign
of weakness, not strength. They are a serious violation
of international humanitarian law and breach the basic
tenets of Islam.

The women of Afghanistan have borne the brunt of
conflict during more than 30 years of war. They have
been the biggest victims of violence. The past year
in Afghanistan was particularly deadly for women,
with 12 per cent more killed and injured than the year
before. Women in Afghanistan, including women
in public roles and girls seeking education, are often
targeted with every kind of gender-based violence.
Even when their lives are not directly at risk, their
livelihoods are affected by the negative consequences
of violent conflict. When husbands, parents, siblings
and guardians die or become handicapped, women are
often left as the family's sole breadwinners. Many lack
access to paid work and financial resources, which
impedes their ability to provide for themselves and their
families and makes them vulnerable to exploitation.
Women displaced by conflict are also economically
vulnerable and at a heightened risk for exploitation and
discrimination.

Mitigating the specific impact ofconflict on women
is a priority for the Government of Afghanistan. In that
regard, the Government is implementing resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent related resolutions through

Afghanistan's national action plan on 1325 for women,
peace and security, signed in October 2014, and our
national action plan for the women of Afghanistan.
Moreover, the Government recognizes the importance
of women's active participation in ending conflict,
and is committed to ensuring that women's voices are
represented in peace, reconciliation and development
efforts in the country.

As attacks on civilians by armed extremists in
Afghanistan are increasing around the country, the
Afghan national defence and security forces have
been engaged in large-scale counter-terrorism and
counter-insurgency efforts. It is tragic that Afghan
civilians, including women and children, are caught
in the crossfire of security operations. However, I
would like to emphasize that the Afghan forces are
doing their utmost to ensure that the safety of civilians
is central to their campaigns, and they are taking all
necessary measures to prevent the loss of life among
Afghan civilians. Thousands of members of the Afghan
security forces have lost their lives fighting armed
insurgents; their bravery and sacrifice are a testament
to the Government's strong commitment to protecting
civilians and bringing peace and security to the country.
In addition, the Government of Afghanistan is pursuing
the vigorous implementation of our national counter-
IED strategy and facilitating ongoing training of the
Afghan national defence and security forces to conduct
counter-IED operations and disposal.

Unfortunately, a number of civilian casualties
occur as a result of explosive remnants of war, which
pose a serious threat to Afghan civilians, particularly
children. Indeed, the majority of the casualties caused
by explosive remnants of war have been among
children. With the sharp rise in kinetic engagements in
2014 and the conclusion of the International Security
Assistance Force mission, the associated risk to civilian
life from such remnants of war is at its highest level.
In that regard, I would like to highlight the importance
of robust efforts to fully support the Afghan national
defence and security forces in marking hazardous
areas, ensuring the clearance of explosive remnants
of war from the battlefield and continuing awareness-
raising programmes that educate civilians, particularly
children, of the deadly dangers of explosive remnants
of war.

The cycle of violence that has interrupted the lives
of innocent Afghans for over 30 years must stop. To
that end, my Government is vigorously pursuing a
reconciliation agenda with the armed opposition and
engagement with countries in the region to move the
process forward. With the support of the international
community and our neighbours, peace and security can
be realized in Afghanistan and all civilians can live with
honour and dignity in a country free from violence.

