Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and to say how pleased we are to have you presiding
over the Security Council. I would also like to thank
you for organizing this open debate on women, the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations. We are grateful for the report presented this
morning by the Secretary-General (S/2013/525) and the
briefings by the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the representative of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, who have given us a clear
idea of the situation under discussion.

In our country, Colombia, we are aware that the
participation of women in decision-making processes
in situations that affect them, especially in conflict
and post-conflict situations, is of great importance for
peace and security, and that States have the primary
responsibility to protect their populations with a
differential approach and a gender perspective.

My delegation recognizes the important results
that the Security Council has achieved in the field. It
is necessary, however, to make a distinction between
the Council's treatment of States that are making
efforts to comply with their international obligations
in the area but are not on the Council's agenda and its
treatment of those States that are on its agenda. We
would therefore suggest that the issues generated in
that context should not only be guided by assessments
and follow-up processes, but they should also place an
emphasis on promoting successful experiences in the
field of cooperation and exchange of know-how and
best practices, giving priority constructive elements.

In considering this issue, the Council and United
Nations bodies should strictly adhere to the agreed
terms of mandates in the resolutions on women and
peace and security that are aimed at protecting women
in situations of Violence, particularly sexual Violence,
as well as decision-making in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Focusing on the issue before us, with respect to the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations, I would like to share the experience of our
country, which is currently debating the subject, while
striving to overcome armed conflict through a process
of dialogue that we hope will lead to peace.

On 12 March, the Government of Colombia
approved the national policy on gender equity and a
comprehensive plan to guarantee a life free of violence,
which constitute reference points for the design and
implementation of sustainable actions for the protection
of women and to ensure the effective enjoyment of
women's rights, with a focus on peacebuilding, cultural
transformation and the promotion of the participation of
women in positions of power and decision-making. The
budget approved by the Colombian Government, which
is a sign of its political commitment, is approximately
$1.75 billion.

Taking into account that 50 per cent of the total
number of victims of conflict are women, the law on
victims and land restitution has made significant gains.
The law established a comprehensive reparations
administration programme that enables major access to
victims, including measures to fully compensate them
for forced displacement and sexual violence in the
context of armed conflict.

In order to know the truth of what happened,
understand the structures of criminal organizations and
determine degrees of responsibility for illegal armed
groups and their collaborators, cases of sexual violence
have been given priority, resulting in the joining of
legal actions and guidelines in the Colombian Attorney
General's Office.

As part of the plan of assistance, support
and reparation, 339,000 persons have received
compensation, 57 per cent of whom are women.
Significant progress has been made. To meet those
commitments, the Government invested an additional
$750 million dollars through August 2013.

Nonetheless, it should be noted that reparations
are not limited to the payouts of resources and money.
Additional actions are being developed, such as setting
up institutions for the exclusive purpose of guaranteeing
the rights of the victims and implementing an emotional
recovery strategy, in which more than 3,000 women are
taking part.

Colombia understands that the role of women in
a post-conflict situation is critical from the moment
that an agreement to achieve peace is sought. In that
regard, my Government has actively encouraged the
participation of women in the ongoing peace process.
For example, the first phase of the process, known as
exploratory talks, was led by a group of five persons
working on behalf of the national Government, two
of whom were women. Furthermore, 60 per cent of
the staff of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Peace are women, which ensures that the cases being
considered are treated with particular sensitivity to
issues of gender and women's rights.

Finally, I would like to stress that the strategies I
have mentioned are a sample of the efforts being made
by Colombian Government to protect women in the
context of conflict, while working for their improvement,
in accordance with the guidelines proposed by the
Security Council and with an increasingly modern and
strengthened institutional system operating within a
framework of respect for the rule of law.

