Ms. Loj (Denmark): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and
thereby once again directing the attention of the
Security Council to the indispensable role of women in
all efforts to build and maintain peace and security. Let
me also thank all four speakers for their introductions
to our debate this morning. Furthermore, I would like
to associate my delegation with the statement to be
delivered later by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

Last year, Denmark warmly welcomed the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). This year,
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/770)
presents an overview of achievements, gaps and
challenges, as well as recommendations for future
action for implementation of the Plan. The report
clearly indicates that much has been done but also that
much more needs to be done, and done better.

Guidelines, workshops and new gender-inclusive
procedures are important stepping-stones, tools for
proper implementation and for achieving the
objectives. But what is the impact of such initiatives?
Have they made a difference for women and girls on
the ground? The sad answer is, we do not really know.

According to the report, a number of gaps and
challenges remain. Let me underline a few of these.
Strong commitment, leadership and accountability at
the highest level in the United Nations are key to
progress. To this, we can all agree. But the report
underlines that lack of leadership and commitment to
pursue the implementation of the Action Plan both in
intergovernmental bodies and in the United Nations
system is one of the serious weaknesses affecting the
implementation of the resolution. Despite the Security
Council's many strategic initiatives to promote gender
equality and support the empowerment of women, its
attention to gender issues is not systematic.

It is furthermore incomprehensible that, in the
United Nations in 2006, there is, in the words of the
report, "lack of a common understanding of gender and
gender mainstreaming and especially of their practical
application" (S/2006/7 70, para. 23). The use of gender
advisers in peacekeeping operations by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) has improved
capacity. However, to really make a difference, gender
advisers must be appointed at the senior level, and their
efforts must be matched by the allocation of necessary
resources. It is a management responsibility to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). I welcome the
efforts undertaken by Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno in this regard.
The report must be credited for unveiling
weaknesses in accountability mechanisms. We all know
that what is measured gets done, and Denmark strongly
urges that the Action Plan be transformed into a
results-based programming, monitoring and reporting
tool.

Denmark places high expectations in the
Peacebuilding Commission's ability to further develop
and strengthen the necessary cooperation and
coordination between the various actors involved and
their civilian and military instruments and capabilities.
Needless to say, the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) must be important guiding principles for the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission.

At the national level, in 2005, Denmark launched
a National Action Plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Plan will now be revised
in the light of experiences gained by all relevant
Danish actors and their partners working in situations
of crisis and conflict. We also co-sponsored a
workshop in Dubai, at which the United Nations Mine
Action Team worked with the United Nations and
national staff from Yemen, Jordan, Afghanistan, Iraq
and the occupied Palestinian territories to ensure that
their mine action programmes promote gender equality.
We intend to follow up on the conference to further
promote gender equality in mine action.

In another effort to implement resolution 1325
(2000), Denmark requested the International Crisis
Group to examine the role of women in peacebuilding
in three of Africa's most deadly conflicts. The report
contained discouraging findings that women are
marginalized in peace processes, grossly
underrepresented in the security sector as a whole, and
largely excluded from the formal economy. And what
about resolution 1325 (2000)? The resolution was by
and large unknown among the actors at the country and
grass-roots levels.

Six years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) the challenge remains. Our political support for
the resolution must be transformed into visible and
documented impact for the millions of women and girls
affected by conflicts.

