Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing on issues of discipline
and behaviour in peacekeeping operations.

We attach great importance to the work on the
problem of the commission of violations, including
sexual abuse by members of United Nations
peacekeeping contingents, as well as United Nations
staff members. We believe that the United Nations and
its Member States must take all possible measures to
prevent and fully put an end to such actions.

No less disturbing is the information regarding
the flagrant cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
committed by foreign non-United Nations troops
deployed in conflict regions with the consent of the
Security Council. Those contingents, like the Blue
Helmets, should bring peace and security to those
States. We categorically reject the provision of any
privileges to those forces over the staff of United Nations
missions. There must be a single set of standards for all
in combating that evil.

Problems related to discipline in United Nations
operations on the ground are not new. For many years,
it has been discussed in the General Assembly in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
in the Fifth and Sixth Committees. Preventive and
proactive measures are also included in resolutions
regularly adopted by the General Assembly, under the
heading of "Criminal accountability of United Nations
officials and experts on missions". Very often, with
active participation by the General Assembly, the
practice of preliminary training and induction courses
for staff has been introduced, which is implemented
by States together with peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. Those measures are already
yielding tangible results.

We believe that the involvement of all Member
States in the process of establishing measures will
determine the effectiveness of their implementation in
practice. The key role lies with the troop-contributing
countries of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
which possess comprehensive information on the
reasons we are unable to reduce and eliminate those
shameful statistics.

Although we continue to believe that issues
of peacekeeping discipline are not related to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Russian delegation showed great understanding from
the very beginning for the United States initiative to
strengthen the message of the unacceptability of sexual
abuse by United Nations contingents under the aegis
of the Security Council. At the same time, the draft
resolution that has been circulated is far from ideal.
It proposes a selective approach by excluding from
the proposed measures both United Nations civilian
personnel and non-United Nations personnel.

At the same time, as a result of ongoing negotiations
in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping on that very
topic, it would simply be wrong to set the Council
against the General Assembly. While in no way do we
minimize the seriousness of the sexual exploitation and
abuse that we are discussing today, we would like to
note that the collective responsibility for such actions
proposed by the Secretary-General and a number of
States raises questions. From our point of view, the
focus should be on efforts made in good faith to find
specific perpetrators, determine their guilt and have
them stand trial.

A separate important task is taking steps to prevent
such crimes and ensuring appropriate training and
vetting of military and civilian personnel deployed in
peacekeeping operations. The main burden there in
cases related to troops and police is borne by troop-
contributing countries. In the case ofcivilian personnel,
the responsibility lies with the Secretariat. In that
regard, we see no grounds for mentorship of Member
States by the Secretariat. Among its ranks, there can
also be people who are equally guilty.

At the same time, unfortunately, there remains the
question of what to do with foreign contingents that
have Security Council mandates to conduct operations
to facilitate the resolution of conflict situations with the
expectation that the operations will be carried out in
good faith. We believe that cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse by such forces should be thoroughly
investigated by contributing countries and those found
guilty must be brought to justice. There can be no
impunity here. Otherwise, the Security Council will
sooner or later have to consider the issue ofwithdrawing
such authority from them.

