Mr. Lal (India): We thank the Uruguay presidency
for organizing this open debate. We have carefully
noted the issues raised in the concept note (S/2017/402, annex) and the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/249). We appreciate the useful remarks of the
Deputy Secretary-General and the other briefers in
that connection.

We also take this opportunity to welcome the
appointment by the Secretary-General of Ms. Pramila
Patten as his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
and Conflict, and assure her of our delegation's support
in the carrying out of her tasks. We also commend the
work of Ms. Zainab Bangura.

Despite the increased focus on the women and peace
and security agenda, and the normative framework that
has evolved during the last decade and a half, women
and girls continue to be major victims despite being
non-combatants. The heinous crimes against humanity
perpetrated by terror networks such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant in West Asia or Boko Haram
in parts of West Africa or Al-Shabaab in East Africa,
especially against women and girl children, are stark
reminders of the serious challenges that need to be
overcome by the international community.

We also agree that there is a need to increase and
institutionalize the involvement of women in conflict
prevention and resolution. That requires not only
normative advice but capacity- and institution-building
at the ground level. Therefore, the issue of women and
peace and security cannot be understood in isolation
from the wider societal context involving gender and
development issues.

The Commission on the Status of Women and the
work done by the Committee on the achievements
of and obstacles encountered by States parties in the
implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women continue
to make significant progress in pushing the gender
empowerment agenda that in itself has a transformative
impact on societies - leading to more sustainable
development and prosperity.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development also
highlights the importance of sustainable development
for ensuring peace and security. India has been an
active participant in the comprehensive deliberations
on women-related issues at the various United Nations
bodies. India has also been among the top contributors
towards UN-Women since its inception five years back.

In the specific context of United Nations
peacekeeping, India has been the lead troop contributor,
with participation in nearly 50 of the 71 peacekeeping
missions, and 13 ofthe current 16 missions. While there
has been only a marginal increase in the overall number
of women peacekeepers, almost a decade ago, in 2007,
India deployed the first ever all-women formed police
unit for peacekeeping with the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. That unit served there until last year. The
Liberian President underlined the contribution of the
force in

"inspiring Liberian women, imparting in them the
spirit of professionalism and encouraging them to
join operations that protect the nation".

The percentage of Liberian women in the country's
security sector has increased threefold since 2007.

India has also taken the lead in hosting specialized
training courses for peacekeepers on sexual violence
in armed conflict situations. They have focused,
among other issues, on the role of women in the
context of post conflict situations. Last month India
hosted the third such specialized course for female
military officers, organized by the Centre for United
Nations Peacekeeping in New Delhi in partnership
with UN-Women. Over 40 women officers from nearly
30 countries attended the course. Such courses provide
the participants not only an opportunity to train to be
ready for deployment but also to network and share
experiences and best practices.

India was the first country to contribute to the
Secretary-General's Trust Fund in Support of Victims
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. Prime Minister
Modi has committed to a higher representation of
Indian female peacekeepers in police units to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. India is committed to
fulfilling the pledge of having 15 per cent of military
observers as women by the end of the year. India has
also committed to providing another all-female formed
police unit.

Prosecution is essential for prevention. The
international community has an important role in
helping to build adequate resources and capacities in
that regard. In that context, India recently contributed
to the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone. The
Special Court was among the landmark tribunals that
tried and convicted persons for crimes that included the
use of child soldiers and forced marriages.

India remains ready to contribute further
internationally both to the normative and to the
practical aspects ofissues relating to women and peace
and security.

