Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to start by thanking Bolivia for having
proposed this year's open debate on women and peace
and security in the broader context of political and
economic empowerment. The link between the women
and peace and security agenda and sustaining peace
has made both of them stronger and more effective. We
also welcome the fact that parallel discussions continue
at the regional level. That was the case last week in
the context of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, where the discussions focused on the crucial
role women, together with men, can play in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding at the grass-roots level.

Allow me also to underline that enabling women
to participate effectively in peacebuilding efforts
and preventing sexual violence against women, but
also against men, are core objectives of Switzerland's
engagement and an essential part of our recently
adopted fourth national action plan on women and peace
and security. Both those objectives are closely linked to
the successful political and economic empowerment of
women. Today I would like to focus on three aspects.

First, women, like men, must be involved in the
political process from the beginning and at all levels.
With Benin, we work on a project to promote women's
participation in decision-making at the local level.
Actions undertaken in that regard include mentoring
potential female candidates for local elections and
promoting the political leadership of women while
raising awareness among men, including in particular
husbands, and advocacy within political parties for a
better positioning of women on electoral lists.

In Bangladesh, Switzerland supported a network
of elected women representatives in the national
Parliament and local Government councils, both by
setting up a network of mentors and advocating among
male elected representatives for structural change.

Secondly, women's economic empowerment
is a precondition for their participation in political
processes. The experiences of Switzerland's
development cooperation show that prioritizing women's
economic empowerment contributes effectively to
conflict prevention. For example, in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Switzerland supported
communities and women to secure land rights through
a certification system. In addition to promoting the
economic empowerment of the people concerned, that
approach has been decisive in the peaceful mediation
ofland disputes. In the Great Lakes region, Switzerland
has also worked to improve the economic prospects of
victims of sexual and gender-based violence. Self-help,
savings and credit groups have been found to play a vital
role in improving the economic situation of victims.

The link between women's economic empowerment
and their participation in peace processes is a
significant element of Switzerland's fourth national
action plan on women and peace and security. We
look forward to working closely with civil society
organizations with a strong global network and relevant
experience and hope to build on the best strategies for
economic empowerment as an enabler of participation
in peace processes.

My third, and final, point relates to the engagement
and empowerment of men and boys in the context of
gender parity. By focusing exclusively on women, we
tend to forget the role of men in political and economic
empowerment. Highlighting the privileges and
vulnerabilities of men may be a game-changer. Thanks
to the work of many champions of gender equality and
the commitment of the Secretary-General to the cause,
we are on the right track.

Echoing the appeal launched by the Women's
International League for Peace and Freedom, we wish
to emphasize the need for holistic action to advance the
women and peace and security agenda. We again thank
Bolivia for broadening the approach to that agenda and
we are determined to build on the results of today's
open debate.

