Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the opportunity of having this debate on
women, peace and security and I congratulate you for
the outstanding job you are doing as President of the
Security Council. I welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General and his commitment, as we are fully
aware, to the rights of women.

Similarly, we would like to highlight the valuable
comments we have heard from Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Louise Arbour and Thoraya Ahmed Obaid.

We also fully endorse the statement that will be
made by the Permanent Representative of Canada on
behalf of the members of the Human Security Network.

During the four years since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), positive
changes have occurred in the international
community's understanding of the effects that conflict
has on peace and security, particularly as concerns
women and girl children. Increasingly, women in our
various countries have achieved greater equality and
participate more in areas related to peace and security.

In this connection, the observations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General (document S/2004/814), dated 13 October 2004, are valuable.
Also of value are the specific actions taken by Member
States, United Nations agencies and civil society to
implement this important resolution, particularly by
providing more training and by promoting
consultation, participation and support to initiatives
taken by women's groups, as well as through improved
knowledge in the area of gender issues. Nonetheless, as
has been said here, much remains to be done.

It is essential that there be full-fledged
participation of women in all stages of a conflict
situation, from prevention to reconstruction. We agree
with the report of the Secretary-General that there are
still gaps, particularly as regards integrating gender
perspectives into peace agreements and giving
appropriate attention to the needs of women in
humanitarian and reconstruction processes. Women
must also be represented in positions of responsibility.

We share the concern that one of the greatest
difficulties in recent years is the increase in sexual
violence. Accordingly, the recommendations put
forward by the Secretary-General enjoy our support, in
that greater pressure must be exerted on the parties to
the conflict to prevent and control these types of
despicable acts.

Similarly, we support his recommendations with
regard to putting an end to impunity for related crimes
and the need to ensure that courts and human rights
monitors have the requisite experience with regard to
gender issues.

Chile has always been strongly committed to
supporting initiatives aimed at the implementation of
this resolution, including the development of
government policies at the domestic level, as well as
supporting civil society. This has been shown by our
Mission's participation in various Arrias-formula
meetings, but, most importantly, by our participation in
two round-tables last January and July, organized by
the Permanent Missions of Canada, the United
Kingdom and Chile, in cooperation with the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security. As a
result of such meetings, an interesting report was
prepared containing useful ideas that should be
considered in the drafting of Security Council
resolutions.

We would like also to emphasize the efforts made
by civil society to take innovative steps towards the
implementation of this resolution, particularly those of
the networks of women's organizations that are
working in the field.

Let me recall that in 2002 my country hosted a
regional seminar on the role of women in peacekeeping
operations. A number of proposals were put forward at
that meeting, including developing regional approaches
to identify strategies for the implementation of the
resolution; supporting the work of high-level gender
advisers in all missions; and establishing mechanisms
to ensure systematic coordination between the Security
Council and civil society.

In conclusion, we would like to say that the time
has come to bridge the gap between theory, as
contained in resolutions, and reality. A great deal of
information is available on the problems facing women
and girl children in the field and on their strengths and
weaknesses. We have committed ourselves to taking a
series of steps and succeeded in creating a solid
international legal framework. However, in practice we
have not known how, or been able, fully to implement
all these measures. We believe that one way of
ensuring the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) would be to devise, and continue to develop,
effective monitoring systems that would make it
possible more systematically to monitor such
implementation.

Finally, let me say that, despite the progress that
has been achieved, we have to continue our work
towards that end. We believe that only the full
participation of women can create greater opportunities
to achieve world peace.

