Mr. Oehri (Lithuania): At the outset, we thank
the Peruvian presidency of the Security Council for
convening an open debate on this important issue. We
also welcome the comprehensive report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/250) and its recommendations. We also
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Pramila Patten, and her team for her
dedication to combating and preventing sexual violence
in conflict. We thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and all briefers for their contribution.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Time and again, since 2008, when Council
resolution 1820 (2008) acknowledged sexual violence as
a threat to security and an impediment to the restoration
peace, we return to the security issue. Time and again,
the Secretary-General's reports a sickening picture
in 19 countries where rape, sexual slavery, forced
prostitution, forced pregnancy and other brutalities
against women and men, girls and boys are employed
by State and non-State actors as tactics of war and
terrorism. Unstable political environments, continued
armed clashes, weak State structures, a climate of
impunity and stigmata related to sexual violence
exacerbate an already grave situation. Yet, most sexual
crimes do not even get reported. Particularly vulnerable
are women in remote rural areas, as well as displaced
and refugee populations that live beyond the protection
of rule-of-law institutions.

The only way to effectively address this scourge
is a comprehensive and integrated approach at the
international, regional and national levels, which entails
prevention, early warning, justice and accountability,
the participation of women in political processes
and political, social and economic empowerment.
Lithuania continuously underlines the importance of
the Secretary-General's efforts to emphasize conflict
prevention, preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The overarching priority of prevention
should be at the forefront of our fight against sexual
violence in conflict. We should look for early warning
indicators to identify potential conflict situations.

Among the positive steps at the United Nations
level, we would mention the efforts to engage with
the listed national military and police forces for the
development of action plans to address violations,
the deployment of women protection advisers and the
meaningful work of the United Nations Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in
providing assistance to Governments by strengthening
their capacities. However, the perpetrators are too often
left unpunished and crimes unresolved, which further
fuels new cycles of violence.

We concur with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that sexual and gender-based
violence should be systematically applied as designation
criteria when adopting or renewing targeted sanctions
in situations of armed conflict. Such a tool could be
more widely used to deter sexual violence and to seek
accountability. International justice mechanisms, such
as the International Criminal Court, can also play a
critical role.

To that end, having strong national institutions
and an adequate judiciary and penal framework is
essential, as is making sure that national civilian and
military justice systems do not lack the capacity and
expertise to prevent, investigate and prosecute sexual
violence. Cooperation mechanisms, including through
awareness-raising campaigns, action plans, capacity-
building and shared good practices, should continue to
actively promote effective responses to conflict-related
sexual crimes. We commend the partnership between
the Justice Rapid Response initiative and UN-Women.
The deployment of justice experts from their joint
roster to more than 50 missions greatly contributes to
ending impunity for perpetrators.

Another vital issue that we should address is
care for and the protection of survivors of sexual
violence. Such violence affects entire generations,
with the stigmatization of women and their children
having lasting repercussions. Public, religious and
community leaders can personally engage in helping
to shift the stigma from the victims of sexual abuse
to the perpetrators of those heinous crimes. Victims
must have access to justice, accountability and redress
mechanisms in order to ensure their reintegration into
society and their economic empowerment.

Even the best tools that we have cannot tackle
sexual violence in conflict if women continue to be on
the sidelines of peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction. Being an active advocate
of gender equality and the empowerment of women,
Lithuania already contributes to achieving those goals
through various initiatives. While striving to deploy
more gender-balanced peacekeeping troop contingents,
Lithuania continuously encourages female military and
police personnel to apply. Training is also crucial to
raising awareness and to improving the implementation
of gender aspects in peace operations. Before their
deployment, Lithuanian peacekeepers therefore
undertake high-quality training on human rights
and gender-related issues, in particular. As a gender-
responsive legal and judicial system constitutes one
of the building blocks of a resilient society, Lithuania
remains committed to ensuring accountability for
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict through
national and international mechanisms.

Moreover, the President of Lithuania, Mrs. Dalia
Grybauskaite, chairs the Council of Women World
Leaders, a network that seeks to mobilize influential
women leaders around the world for collective action
on issues of critical importance to women. In June
this year, the Women Political Leaders Summit will
take place in Vilnius, where women from all over
the world will discuss, among other issues, how
women, particularly political leaders, can advance
peace and security. We also commend a promising
achievement - the establishment of the Women
African Leaders Network - and encourage similar
initiatives in other regions of the world.

In conclusion, all Member States should redouble
their efforts to implement Sustainable Development
Goal 5 on achieving gender equality and empowering all
women and girls to become actors rather than victims in
their societies. All countries should review and revoke
any discriminatory laws and practices and challenge
stereotypes that hinder women's empowerment. Only
then, will the hard-won progress in the area of women's
rights be maintained and continue to break the cycles of
gender-based violence.

