Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
May I begin by congratulating your delegation,
Mr. President, on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I reiterate that we
are eager to contribute to your success in the conduct
of our work. Costa Rica welcomes your presence in
this debate and we thank you for organizing it. We also
express our gratitude for the presence of the Deputy
Secretary-General and of Ms. Mayanja, Ms. Alberdi
and Ms. Amin.

During the past year much thought has been
given in the Security Council to the issue of women
and peace and security. We responded to gender
concerns through resolution 1820 (2008) last year. The
recently adopted resolution 1888 (2009) and resolution
1889 (2009), adopted today, all contribute to
strengthening a process that began with the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). That resolution pioneered the
recognition of the needs of women as victims of
conflict and of the role they can play as protagonists in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

Despite these efforts, women's participation
remains marginal, as pointed out by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2009/465). Resolution 1325
(2000) paved the way for future developments. Its
broad scope is one of its main strengths, but it has also
made it more difficult to address some key challenges
effectively. Its weak implementation framework and
the absence of adequate follow-up mechanisms has
limited progress and made it slow and uneven.

In order to re-energize its implementation, we
still need to consolidate a global strategy with clear
targets and adequate benchmarks for measuring
progress. In this regard, resolution 1889 (2009),
adopted today, calls for greater empowerment of
women in the evaluation of needs and in planning in
post-conflict situations. That is certainly a step in the
right direction.

As highlighted in the Secretary-General's report,
and as reflected in the text of this new resolution, we
need to promote a multisectoral and, above all,
inclusive approach. In addition to enhancing the gender
perspective in conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
women's participation in the international community's
efforts should be strengthened, especially in the areas
of prevention and protection. In this regard, my
delegation supports the appeal to the Secretary-General
to design a strategy that includes a more equitable
representation of women in decision-making posts as
special representatives, special envoys and heads of
mission, among other positions. My delegation also
supports the concept of complementing the Security
Council's response with measures to increase women's
access to justice, health, education and social
protection, especially for survivors of abuse and
exploitation.

Costa Rica co-sponsored the text of resolution
1889 (2009), but we would like to make clear that our
country rejects any interpretation that seeks to include
abortion in the reference made in operative paragraph
10 to reproductive rights. We believe that lasting peace
cannot be built on the basis of a status quo that in many
cases has been characterized by discrimination,
inequity and an imbalance of power. Frequently these
structures are among the root causes of conflict.

Lastly, on behalf of the Human Security
Network- made up of Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Switzerland, Slovenia and Thailand, and South Africa
as an observer member - we would like to welcome
the conclusion of the process leading to the adoption of

this new resolution. The members of the Network are
committed to supporting significant progress to
promote and strengthen the role of women in
peacebuilding processes. This commitment compelled
us to dedicate our eleventh Ministerial Meeting, held in
Dublin last May, to analysing the topic of how to
promote the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The members of the Network
continue to consider possible joint actions in the future,
and we hope that the consideration of this important
topic by our interregional group, with a human-security
perspective, will contribute to the debate on women
and peace and security in the run-up to the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in October of
next year.

