Mr. Matussek (Germany): Germany aligns
herself with the statement made by Sweden on behalf
of the European Union. As a member of the Group of
Friends of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), we
attach great importance to the issue of women and
peace and security. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this open debate.

Women and children need to be protected from
violence. Every day, we bear witness to unspeakable
09-54249

atrocities. This is especially the case in post-conflict
situations in which police protection does not exist and
judicial systems lie in shatters. Institutions need to be
rebuilt, but protection cannot wait until the systems are
fully functional. Protection must take place from the
very first minute of peacebuilding - for the benefit of
the victims but also for the benefit of the whole
community, since rape and sexual violence destroy the
very components of societies. Thus, sustainable peace
cannot be achieved without the protection of the most
vulnerable, namely, women and children.

Women are not only victims of conflicts but
powerful agents for peace and security. Therefore, the
empowerment of women to fulfil this potential is of the
utmost importance. The system of granting
microcredits to women has proved successful within
the context of development cooperation. Empowering
women would also help in security sector reform as
well as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. Women need to be included in peace
negotiations and in decision-making processes for
rebuilding countries and societies after they have been
torn apart by war. Only by including the gender
perspective in these efforts can a thorough, sustainable
and all-inclusive peace be achieved.

What can Member States do? I will give the
Council just a few examples. Germany has advocated
the inclusion of gender advisers in all European
Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) missions. The
mission of the European Union-led peacekeeping force
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo had, for the
first time, such an adviser among its personnel. During
Germany's presidency, gender advisers were part of all
ESDP missions. Also, the deployment of female
soldiers enhanced the success of operations. For
example, the presence of female soldiers to check
women and children at checkpoints proved to
de-escalate the situation on the ground. In Cambodia,
Germany supports a project of the Ministry of
Women's and Veteran's Affairs that focuses on
capacity-building and gender mainstreaming. Finally,
all German police and military personnel must undergo
gender training.

What can the United Nations do? Security Council
resolution 1888 (2009) and resolution 1889 (2009),
adopted today, are yet another milestone in the fight
against sexual violence and for the empowerment of
women for the maintenance of peace and security. We
now have a whole range of tools available to prevent
3
sexual violence and to respond rapidly to situations in
which violence occurs. The new composite gender
entity that the General Assembly has decided to
establish as part of system-wide coherence will help to
coordinate these and all other instruments that already
exist within the United Nations. I echo the presidency
of the European Union in calling upon the Secretary-
General and his Deputy to quickly start working on the
establishment of this entity.

Let me suggest and reiterate three more targets.
The United Nations needs to continue working together
with women's non-governmental organizations on the
ground in post-conflict areas. It has to strive to include
more women in peacekeeping missions at all levels and
to improve its own performance, but also to set an
example for the countries concerned. And United
Nations entities must expand their activities related to
the delivery of basic services that women in post-
conflict situations need, especially access to health
care, education and justice systems.

Next year is the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). Let us try to reach these targets by that
date so we will be able to proclaim some progress that
will benefit and guide all people in the world that need
our help and look to us for support.

