Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), unanimously adopted on 31
October 2000, is considered the most significant legal
and political document in the advancement of the role
of women in the fields of peace and security. It was
welcomed by women worldwide, particularly women
in situations of armed conflict and women living under
foreign occupation, as it was seen as an essential tool
for their protection and empowerment.

Indeed, resolution 1325 (2000) not only provides
tools to strengthen women's capacity and promote
gender equality, but also addresses the impact of armed
conflict and war on women, calling for measures to be
taken by the international community, including the
Security Council, to protect them in times of conflict,
post conflict and peace. It is also important to recall
that the Council expressed concern that civilians,
mainly women and children, account for the vast
majority of those adversely affected by armed conflict,
and it reaffirmed the need to fully implement
international humanitarian and human rights law for
the protection of the rights of women and girls during
and after conflicts.

The importance of resolution 1325 (2000) for
Palestinian women stems from its content and direct
applicability to their unique situation. On one hand, it
provides a framework for their protection against the
crimes committed by Israel, the occupying Power,
while, on the other, it recommends the means to
strengthen their role in the decision-making process,
including in terms of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding.

Regrettably, however, women's hopes for more
tangible improvements in their daily lives have not
been realized. A review of indicators regarding the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) shows that
little progress has been achieved and that major gaps
remain between the objectives of the resolution and
their attainment. In this context, we share the
assessment made by the Secretary-General in his
report, in which he stated:

"Despite an apparent firm foundation and
promise, 10 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), significant achievements are
difficult to identify or quantify. The conditions
that women and girls face in situations of armed
conflict continue to be abhorrent and effective
methods for monitoring their impact are lacking."
(S/2010/498, para. 3)

This regrettable fact is extremely tragic in the
case of Palestinian women. Their situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, remains one of a dire humanitarian crisis
that has impacted all aspects of their daily lives,
causing extensive suffering, misery and loss. Indeed,
the vast toll of the Israeli occupation on Palestinian
women cannot be overemphasized; nor can the impact
of Israel's systematic human rights violations against
Palestinian women and their families.

This now 43-year Israeli military occupation has
caused innumerable hardships and challenges for
Palestinian women, which require the international
community, in line with resolution 1325 (2000) and
other relevant resolutions, to exert greater efforts to
finally bring an end to this deplorable situation.
Moreover, in the context of today's debate, we believe
it is appropriate to call once again upon the
international community to hold Israel accountable for
all the crimes committed against Palestinian women
and to end its impunity.

A recent, tragic example of the international
community, mainly the Security Council, failing to
protect Palestinian women came during and after the
latest Israeli war of aggression against the Gaza Strip,
with its traumatizing impact on women and children.
That failure shows the extent to which resolution 1325
(2000) has been totally ignored and breached by the
occupying Power without any accountability. In this
regard, we continue to witness unbearable human
suffering in the Gaza Strip as a result of that
aggression, in which more than 1,400 civilians were
brutally killed, including hundreds of innocent women
and children, and 5,500 other civilians were injured.
This, along with the widespread destruction of
Palestinian property and infrastructure and gross
violations of human rights committed against the
Palestinian civilian population by the occupying
Power, has compounded the dire consequences that the
illegal, inhumane Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip has
had on the population, with severe poverty,
unemployment and rampant hardship gravely
impacting the socio-economic and psychological
conditions of Palestinian women.

At the same time, living conditions in the West
Bank remain intolerable, in particular as a result of
Israel's ongoing seizure and colonization of Palestinian
land, particularly in and around East Jerusalem, for the
construction and expansion of illegal settlements and
the apartheid annexation wall, as well as ongoing home
demolitions and evictions, resulting in the continued
dispossession and displacement of Palestinian women
and their families, obstruction of freedom of movement
and acts of terror and Violence by Israeli settlers
against innocent Palestinian civilians. Those and
countless other Israeli Violations, together with the
constant humiliation of the Palestinian population,
continue to have vicious consequences on the
advancement and empowerment of Palestinian women.

In conclusion, as we observe the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), let us renew our
commitment to action and shoulder our responsibility
to take more effective measures to fully implement this
important legislation by the Security Council. Let us
move forward on our commitment to end all types of
violence against women, protect them from the scourge
of war and advance their participation at the highest
level, for these are surely key components of peace and
security in our world.

