Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having taken the initiative to
convene this public debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and on the issue of promoting women's
participation in peace processes. I also thank
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Ms. Ines Alberdi, Ms. Sarah
Taylor and Mr. Alain Le Roy for their introductory
briefings.

Belgium aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of France on behalf of the
European Union.

Before turning to the specific issue of the
participation of women in peace processes, I wish to

voice the View that, eight years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we should ask ourselves - as
Ms. Taylor has asked - about our implementation of
that resolution. Despite the efforts of the United
Nations system, described in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/622), and the efforts we
have all made, the resolution's objectives have not
been attained. The situation of women in conflict and
post-conflict zones remains worrisome - indeed,
tragic. The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in its entirety is the duty of all Member States, and
their role and responsibility are vital.

By the end of this year, Belgium will present its
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The preparation of the action plan, in
consultation with civil society, has been an enriching
experience for all the Belgian political and
administrative entities involved. The drafting of the
plan has revealed a series of challenges both internally
and with respect to our multilateral activities. For
example, we have seen that the gender dimension must
be mainstreamed in our fight to achieve a ban on the
use of anti-personnel landmines and cluster bombs,
whose primary victims are women and children.

At the internal level we have seen that good
gender-equality legislation alone has not been
sufficient. Even though they may reflect firm political
will, legislative texts must be combined with
investment in know-how in the sphere of gender issues
if they are to be implemented effectively.

We all agree that we need a better balance -
parity - between women and men in international
organizations, especially in the highest positions. To
achieve that, more women must show their readiness to
accept such high-level posts. In this, they must be
encouraged and, above all, supported. As part of its
policy on applications for international posts, Belgium
actively encourages women candidates.

You were entirely right, Mr. President, to place
the issue of the participation of women in peace
processes at the heart of our debate. Resolution 1325
(2000) recognizes and stresses the need to involve
women in all aspects and phases of the transition in
countries emerging from conflict, as well as in the
peace process itself, in restoring the rule of law and in
rebuilding economic systems.

One cannot restore lasting peace without the
involvement of women. Ms. Mayanja pointed that out
eloquently. We must involve women to a much greater
extent in specific issues that arise at the end of a
conflict. It is important that women are able not simply
to state their needs, including with regard to justice and
reconstruction; they must also be able to participate
genuinely in the decision-making process.

Peacekeeping missions have the responsibility to
ensure that the place of women in peace processes is
assured. From the outset of a mission, the community
of women at the local level, on the ground, and, where
they exist, women leaders must be encouraged and
invited to defend and present their opinions and to
participate in public decisions. The Security Council
has an important role to play in that respect. Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy also indicated that in his
briefing.

Allow me to conclude by recalling resolution
1820 (2008), which deals with the problem of sexual
violence in armed conflicts. In its condemnation of the
use of all forms of violence and sexual violence against
civilians, that resolution, as Ms. Alberdi said, is an
essential complement to resolution 1325 (2000). The
scourge of sexual violence must be eliminated without
delay. For Belgium, that remains the priority in our
overall implementation of the resolution on women,
peace and security.

