Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I wish to thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate on the important
matter before us. Iwould also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his remarks and for his report (S/20l4/181).
I am also grateful to Special Representative Zainab
Bangura for her presentation, and I wish to commend
her and her Office for the crucial role that they have
been playing in international efforts to combat sexual
violence in conflict.

May I also to refer to the very moving presentation
by Ms. Rhoda Misak, from the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security. May the Council and
the United Nations membership more broadly heed
the six areas of serious concern related to the situation
in South Sudan and sexual violence in all conflicts,
including in those situations that are not the focus of
the international community.

Let me also express my satisfaction in welcoming
the Minister of National Defence of our sister nation
Ecuador, Her Excellency Ms. Maria Fernanda Espinosa,

to participate in this debate. I think that all ofus in South
America feel very well represented by her statement.

The use of sexual violence as a weapon of war
is abhorrent and utterly unacceptable. These crimes
destroy the social fabric of communities and inflict
long-lasting psychological trauma.

We welcome the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict, issued at the beginning
of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly,
which Brazil supported.

The latest report of the Secretary-General serves
as a stark reminder that sexual violence is still being
used as a tool of intimidation and social control in
conflict and post-conflict situations. It rightly states
that the prevalence of sexual violence during conflict
often leaves lasting effects with acute consequences
for the security of women and children in peacetime.
Ultimately, that has a direct bearing on the durability of
peace and prospects for sustainable development.

Brazil has repeatedly condemned all forms of
violence against all women and girls, including sexual
violence in conflict. We continue to advocate that
one of the most important ways to combat conflict-
related sexual violence lies in policies aimed at the
prevention and peaceful resolution of armed conflicts.
Preventative measures could prove instrumental to
spare the human and psychological costs associated
with sexual violence. They involve, among other
things, strengthening national capacities, changing
how victims are perceived in their communities and
protecting witnesses. They also encompass curbing
the availability of weapons used to commit those
atrocities, ensuring, through adequate predeployment
training, that peacekeeping missions are increasingly
instrumental in preventing conflict-related sexual
violence, and promoting criminal accountability and
due prosecution of sexual violence crimes.

The international community has adopted an
extensive legal framework dealing with violence against
women. The 1993 General Assembly Declaration on
the Elimination of Violence against Women (General Assembly resolution 48/104), the 1993 Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action, and the 1995
Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action, inter alia,
include requirements for the prohibition of all forms of
gender-based violence to be incorporated into national
legislation. Peace agreements and post-conflict
measures should build on those and other frameworks
under international law.

However, in practice, peace agreements rarely
make reference to the need to eradicate all forms of
violence against all women and girls. They seldom
include provisions linked to accountability for gender-
based violence. Post-conflict arrangements hardly
ever deal with the situation of women who have been
subjected to violence during conflict and its aftermath.
Sexual violence, including domestic violence, is still
not sufficiently viewed as a threat to peacebuilding and
related to broader issues ofinsecurity.

Conflict-related sexual violence needs to be
explicitly addressed in security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. More has to be done to ensure that women
are active participants in peace agreements and in the
negotiation, design and implementation ofpost-conflict
and peacebuilding arrangements.

Brazil is aiding victims of sexual violence in
various countries, including Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A Brazilian
donation of$1 million to the Office ofthe United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, specifically
intended to help victims of sexual violence seek
reparations and justice, has so far benefited 510 victims
of sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In the same spirit, the Brazilian Cooperation
Agency has implemented projects with the United
Nations Population Fund in Haiti and Guinea-Bissau,
focusing on capacity-building to deal with victims of
gender-based violence in areas such as health, justice
and security.

On the domestic front, Brazil has incorporated, in
its National Policy Plan on Women for the 2013-2015
biennium, the relevant recommendations contained
in resolution 1325 (2000), including those aimed at
fighting sexual violence as a weapon of war. In March
2013, the Brazilian Ministry of External Relations
hosted a seminar, organized by the Igarape Institute
think-tank, on the theme "Women, Peace and Security
in Brazil: overcoming challenges and bridging gaps".
The event proved to be a fruitful opportunity to assess
ways in which Brazil could advance the discussion at
the national level and contribute towards multilateral
efforts on women and peace and security.

I would like to highlight once more the importance
of the empowerment of women for the prevention of
sexual and all other forms of Violence against women
and, in a broader context, for the prospects of sustainable
peace. As already recognized by the Peacebuilding
Commission, the transformative potential of greater
participation by women in the economic and political
spheres can make an invaluable contribution to building
more peaceful, democratic and prosperous societies.
During a recent trip to Guinea-Bissau, in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, I was impressed by the
contribution that women's organizations have made to
forging a more inclusive political culture in the country.

Finally, I wish to pay tribute to those who have been
working closely with the victims of sexual violence to
lessen their suffering. The name of Dr. Denis Mukwege
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo comes to mind
as an example of courage, selflessness and solidarity.
His authoritative call for action during his statement to
the General Assembly in 2012 continues to resonate to
this day.

The international community should use this
periodic debate as an opportunity to renew its
commitment to the creation of a world where women,
men and children do not have to endure the suffering of
being a victim or a victim's relative of sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict situations.

