Mr. Minami (Japan): I thank you very much,
Madam President, for your initiative to convene this
open debate on such a timely issue.

At the outset, I should like to emphasize that the
Prime Minister of Japan, Mr. Shinzo Abe, places
great importance on the promotion and protection of
women's rights and women's participation. We aim for
a society in which women shine, not only domestically
but also globally, including in conflict-affected and
post-disaster situations.

In order to effectively empower women, we
must undertake holistic interventions, which include
improving education, enhancing livelihoods, increasing
access to reproductive health care and reducing
gender-based violence. In September, Japan hosted the
symposium of the World Assembly for Women (WAW! Tokyo 2014). I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, tExecutive Director of
UN-Women, and Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for their participation and
contributions. The Chair of the conference drafted
a summary of the opinions expressed during the
symposium and issued a set of 12 concrete proposals.
Turning to today's agenda item, Japan, in
cooperation with United Nations agencies such as
UN-Women and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as various
non-governmental organizations, has been supporting
numerous projects around the globe related to the main
theme of today's discussion. I would like to showcase
some of our efforts.

First, I would like to highlight the story of Hamidah
Hassan, who was introduced in our Prime Minister's
address to the General Assembly in September (see A/69/PV.9). She is a girl of 10 years living in camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Mogadishu.
Japan provided the camps with solar lanterns made by
a Japanese company, Panasonic, which banks electrical
energy generated from sunlight during the day and
converts it to lamplight at night. A lighted tent not only
acts as a deterrent to sexual violence, but also under that
light, she is now able to work and study later into the
evening and dreams that one day that she will become
a doctor.

Secondly, economic independence is critically
important to the advancement of the status of
women and to decreasing violence against them,
especially in displaced settings. Faced with the grave
humanitarian crisis in and around Syria, Japan has
supported UN-Women activities aimed at economic
empowerment, such as vocational training and cash-
for-work programmes for female Syrian refugees and
IDPS.

Japan has also supported the activities of the
Government of Jordan to assist Palestinian female
refugees in the country. That project has provided
instruction for refugees in such skills as dressmaking,
using donated kimonos, which is a traditional Japanese
dress, as instructive materials. It has also provided
marketing lectures to educate women in the tailoring
business. Those two examples are just indicative,
but represent two important aspects, protection and
empowerment. In today's discussion, I think those
two aspects have been mentioned by many delegates.
Protection and empowerment are the main pillars of
human security, which Japan has been advocating for
more than 10 years.

I would now like to mention the follow-up to
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). In the World
Assembly for Women symposium in September, we
recognized that high-level political leadership and
commitment are essential for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Japan and civil society have
been earnestly developing a national action plan, which
we expect to be able to launch before the end of the
year. Japan also wishes to support the development
and the implementation of the national action plans of
developing countries.

Finally, in July, our Permanent Mission to the
United Nations held a panel discussion in collaboration
with a civil society organization, the Global Network
of Women Peacebuilders. We hope the summary of the
discussion, together with the recommendations of the
World Assembly symposium and, most importantly,
the implementation of our national action plan,
which includes more than 100 indicators, will serve
as inputs to the global assessment of resolution 1325
(2000). Through such efforts, Japan commits itself to
contributing to furthering the momentum towards the
high-level review in October 2015.

