Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
expressing our appreciation to the Russian presidency
for convening this meeting. We also thank the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN-Women and the
representative of civil society for their briefings on
this theme.

Ethiopia welcomes the progress made in
mainstreaming a gender perspective in the work
of the Security Council since the adoption of the
groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security. The
establishment of the women and peace and security
normative framework to protect women affected by
conflict and enhance their effective participation at
all levels in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
and peacekeeping efforts is indeed a step in the
right direction.

Nevertheless, we recognize the existing
implementation gaps in the women and peace and
security normative architecture identified in the report
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
and through the global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Without any doubt, more needs
to be done to advance the women and peace and security
agenda. In that regard, we note with great concern the
heightened risk of violence or threats to the physical
safety of women and their exposure to sexual abuse or
harassment in conflict and post-conflict situations.

We believe that the sustained engagement of the
Council, without encroaching on the mandate of other
United Nations bodies, including the General Assembly,
is critical in pushing forward the women and peace and
security agenda. In that regard, the efforts ofthe Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
established pursuant to the 2015 high-level review,
aimed at ensuring the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and other subsequent resolutions, continue
to be very important. Most important, mainstreaming
the women and peace and security agenda requires
effective coordination and consistent engagement
among the relevant stakeholders, including among
UN-Women, Special representatives of the Secretary-
General, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and troop- and police contributing countries, among
many others. In that vein, a coordinated reporting
mechanism could also be envisaged to monitor the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and highlight the protection challenges, with a
View to providing the necessary assistance to conflict-
affected countries.

As a major troop- and police-contributing country,
Ethiopia has been working towards increasing the
participation of women. We are particularly proud
that Ethiopia is one of the leading contributors of
female peacekeepers. We will continue to enhance the
participation of our women in the military, police and
civilian components.

I wish to conclude my remarks by reaffirming our
commitment to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.

The President (spoke in Russian) I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.

