Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his introduction
this morning and to congratulate Ms. Bachelet, Alain Le
Roy, Ambassador Ali, Thelma Awori and the
participating ministers for their important interventions.
I would also like to thank you, Sir, and Uganda for
leading the Council's efforts to mark the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

This Council has adopted many resolutions over
the decades, but few have changed the way in which
we look at conflict. Resolution 1325 (2000) did just
that. In many respects, it opened the Council's eyes to
what now seems obvious - that women are not only
the principal victims of many conflicts, but also that
they are essential to preventing and resolving conflict.

British Foreign Secretary William Hague regrets
that he is not able to be here, but he has today issued a
statement to mark this debate, from which I shall now
quote.

"Countless women have dedicated their
lives, and in some cases sacrificed their lives in
order to bring peace to societies ravaged by war
and to stand up for human rights.

"Today we pay tribute to these women
and reaffirm our commitment to work for the
protection of women in armed conflict and for
their active involvement in conflict resolution.

"No society can address its problems by
drawing solely on the talents of only half of the
population. Lasting peace cannot be
achieved unless there is justice for the female
victims of war and unless they are actively
involved in rebuilding societies in which their
rights are respected and their voices are heard."

Today is first an opportunity to reflect on the
progress we have made since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). At the United Nations, we now have a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
tackle violence against women in conflict, a new agency
in the form of UN Women, and a greater number of
women in leadership roles. Outside the United Nations,
22 Member States have adopted national action plans.
Partnerships between Governments and women's
organizations and the integration of gender perspectives
into development, political and defence policies are
increasingly common. We should pay particular tribute
to the role that is being played by women's groups and
civil society to build awareness and strengthen the
argument for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on the ground.

But recent events in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo serve as a sobering reminder of the scale of
the challenges we still face. We welcome the two
high-profile arrests for the mass rapes that took place in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo this summer as
the first sign that impunity will not be tolerated. As the
Security Council witnessed on our recent mission to the
Sudan, devastating sexual violence continues to destroy
the lives of women trying to rebuild communities in
Darfur. And yet, during that visit we also had the
chance to hear how inspiring women leaders are
striving to rebuild inclusive and democratic societies in
southern Sudan. Overall, as the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2010/498) confirms, the burden of
conflict still falls primarily on the very part of society
that we rely on to rebuild families and communities.

Looking forward, there are three main challenges
on which we shall need to focus in the coming years.

First, we still lack effective methods for
understanding the problem and monitoring the impact
of our work. The adoption today of indicators
represents an important step forward. We will, for the
first time, be able to understand the scale of the
challenges we face, evaluate the progress we are
making and target our approaches more effectively. We
encourage the Secretary-General to operationalize
these indicators as widely as possible.

Secondly, women remain acutely
underrepresented in peace negotiations, and they are
often marginalized in efforts to build sustainable peace.
As others have said, fewer than one in five peace
agreements contain specific provisions on women's
rights and needs. We need to ensure that women are
included in conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding as a matter of course. We welcome the
Secretary-General's report on women's participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466) as an important step in that
direction.

Thirdly, we must ensure that the entire
international community takes responsibility for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). This requires
more than just warm words; it requires meaningful
actions that will ultimately make a difference to the
situation of women on the ground. Making this
difference, i.e. protecting women and supporting their
participation in conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
is a global challenge that requires action by all Member
States.

The tenth anniversary has brought new
momentum to this Council's work on women, peace
and security. The challenge now is to translate that
momentum into concrete action on the ground. The
United Kingdom stands ready to play its part. The

British Government has just approved a new action
plan that sets out our future commitments, including
specific strategies for supporting women in priority
countries, such as Afghanistan, Nepal and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

All of us, the United Nations, Member States and
regional organizations, must seize the opportunity and
take forward this ambitious agenda.

