Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for presiding over
this meeting and for enabling us to discuss important
aspects of the issue of preventing conflict twice in
three days. These two debates (see S/PV.6946) are
inextricably connected, given the fact that the problem
of sexual violence is deeply rooted in conflict and not
merely an incidental symptom of it. The short period
during which these discussions have taken place has
served to sow the seeds ofthe success ofyour presidency
for the month of April. By the same token, I would
like to acknowledge the efforts of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon in achieving this lofty and noble goal.
I would also like to thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as Ms. Saran
Keita Diakite of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for their exhaustive briefings and
complete and concrete efforts in this area.

We have carefully studied the Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/149) in the context of today's discussion.
In that connection, we would like to express our
appreciation for the information it contains, as well as
for its conclusions, which should give powerful impetus
to and pave the way for efforts aimed at curbing sexual
violence against women, children and the elderly in
armed conflict. The report describes the achievements
of the States concerned in complying with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as well as in taking
measures to prevent sexual violence. It also mentions
a number of legal and institutional obstacles that stand
in the way of achieving the ideal of full protection for
women and children in conflict, as well as incorporating
and integrating them into the fabric of society.

The Kingdom of Morocco commends the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
particularly in the area of fostering and preserving the
progress that has been made, as well as for affirming
the shared responsibility of society for combating
sexual violence. By the same token, we commend the
United Nations initiative on combating sexual violence
so as to help those working in peacekeeping operations,
as well as to create partnerships between the United
Nations and interested parties for strengthening
national competence and skills in order to help curb
sexual violence committed by parties to a conflict and
to protect and support survivors. Implementing such
partnerships, and the provision of adequate resources
for their effective use, will contribute to achieving
these humanitarian goals. By the same token, we
would also like to emphasize the importance of taking
into consideration the various views and standpoints,
and of consulting with the relevant States concerning
the establishment of early detection mechanisms for
preventing sexual violence.

With regard to the implementation of reporting
and oversight mechanisms - and in accordance with
resolution 1960 (2010), as mentioned in the report of
the Secretary-General - we hope that such measures
will serve as the basis for evidence-based actions.
Such measures should be objective and meticulous in
monitoring sexual violence in conflict and should be
carried out in an atmosphere of complete objectivity
and independence. They should also primarily relate
to Security Council resolutions, aim at supporting
international efforts to protect women and girls in
conflict and underscore the importance of preventing
such crimes.

With regard to prevention, the report of the
Secretary-General states that the establishment of
refugee camps near conflict areas and the difficulty
of gaining access to them, in addition to the lack of
registration records for refugees, impede efforts to
safeguard refugees and to alleviate their daily suffering.

The protection of refugees is the responsibility of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and of host countries. The
protection of refugees constitutes a significant part
of UNHCR functions, in addition to identifying and
registering them. The needs of refugees must be met
and services must be provided to them to guarantee
their freedom of movement and expression. They should
not be subjected to humanitarian or political blackmail.

Rape and conflict-related sexual violence have
deep repercussions for victims, survivors and families.
The psychological, social and economic effects increase
the marginalization of those groups from society with
regard to their access to social and medical services. The
signing of peace agreements and ceasefires by parties
to a conflict should lead to developing programmes that
result in an immediate cessation of sexual violence.
Addressing that phenomenon is a main peacebuilding
pillar agreed to by the parties.

Committing to combating impunity, implementing
cooperation programmes with the judiciary to try
perpetrators, and providing reparations to victims of
sexual violence constitute the necessary safeguards to
ensure that such crimes will not recur. Commitments in
that regard must be implemented on the ground; that is
a fundamental element in preventing the crimes.

In many countries, developing codes of conduct for
security and police forces is very important to providing
comprehensive protection from sexual Violence. In that
connection, I wish to acknowledge the efforts made by
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict while taking into consideration
factors related to national expertise and experience,
with a view to reforming the judiciary and facilitating
access to it for victims.

Achieving the desired objectives in curbing sexual
violence requires the involvement of all parties and
the efforts of public authorities, national human rights
organizations and every component of civil society,
including women's associations, so as to mobilize the
necessary efforts to put an end to that scourge. To that
end, there must be sufficient technical support and
financing from donors.

Sexual violence against women and children in
conflict is a crime against the dignity, innocence and
humanity of those vulnerable groups. We should not
remain silent or condone such crimes or diminish their
serious consequences.

Furthermore, sexual violence in conflict threatens
social stability and hampers national reconciliation and
the unity of a society in the post-conflict stage. We
have a long way to go, but that should not dissuade the
international community from tackling this scourge on
all levels and with all the means available.

