Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank the Security Council for
this opportunity to address members of the Council.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening an open
discussion on sexual violence in conflict during your
joint presidency. Fiji congratulates the Security Council
on its adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) against sexual
violence earlier today.

Since 2000, there have been several resolutions
on combating sexual violence in conflict. Those
resolutions highlight that women are subjected to the
most inhumane and systematic torture, rape and abuse
during conflicts, which often continue well after
peace settlements have been secured. Some of those,
as told forcefully this morning by the brave Nobel
Laureate Ms. Nadia Murad, have occurred within the
broader context of genocide as well - they are all war
crimes regardless.

The Secretary-General briefed the Security Council
that in spite of a more robust normative framework,
there has been an onset of an epidemic of targeted
sexual violence in conflicts. Rape, sexual Violence and
slavery have become systematic weapons of war across
so many of the world's conflicts. The perpetrators
of these crimes, largely against women, go mostly
unpunished. All of those victims remind us of how far
we need to travel.

I draw the Security Council's attention to the special
role that peace operations can play in addressing what
the Special Representative this morning called history's
greatest silence - an epidemic of sexual violence
as a weapon of war. Special skills and resources are
required by peace operations if they are to combat and
prevent sexual violence in conflict. Fiji, a long-serving
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping, is upscaling
its peacekeeping contingents. We are significantly
increasing the number of women peacekeepers
because we know that women peacekeepers bring with
them empathy. Women peacekeepers are far better at
understanding patterns of sexual violence in conflict.
Women peacekeepers are better at identifying signs of
systematic sexual violence early. Women in medical
support units help overcome deep barriers that victims
of sexual violence face in accessing medical help,
trauma counselling and in seeking other support.

Peace operations are an important part of the
international response. Fiji is making progress in
improving its preparedness for peace operations,
with the support of Australia, New Zealand and other
partners. Our approach is not only about getting more
women into peacekeeping; it is about ensuring that all
peacekeepers have the soft skills to recognize signs of
sexual violence in conflict early, that they are able to
record evidence and work across the United Nations
system to support victims. The focus must always be
on support for the victims first.

Fiji has learned a lot from our experiences across
peace operations in Timor-Leste, Kosovo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Iraq, Lebanon, Darfur in the Sudan, South
Sudan and other regions. Those experiences have drawn
our attention to the pressing need for peacekeepers to
prepare far better in order to respond to conflict-related
sexual violence.

During conflict, law and order is the first to
suffer. Women thus have little recourse to governance
institutions; they suffer violence without being able
to access their own national or local institutions.
Major conflicts around the world share an important
character - the growing brutality of systemic sexual
violence. The most recent experience of Yazidi women,
which Ms. Nadia Murad personified this morning, is a
testimony to that.

In recognizing the bravery of Ms. Nadia Murad
and the determination and perseverance of Dr. Denis
Mukwege, the Nobel Committee has helped to draw
international attention to this growing tragedy. The
Security Council needs to do its part. The United
Nations system as a whole needs to play its part. It
was more than 10 years ago that the Council adopted
resolution 1820 (2008), recognizing sexual violence as
a weapon and tactic of war. Rape and other forms of
sexual violence can constitute a war crime and a crime
against humanity. As the Secretary-General informed us
this morning, in spite of a strong normative framework
the facts on the ground have not changed much.

By sharing their experiences with us, Ms. Nadia
Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege inspire us to act. Their
ask is simple. The United Nations needs to respond
to what Ms. Amal Clooney said in her briefing to
the Council this morning. We are facing an epidemic
of sexual violence in conflict. Justice is the antidote.
United Nations peace operations need to have the
strongest possible emphasis on the protection ofcivilians
in their mandate. The prevention of sexual violence
must be given absolute priority within enhanced peace
operations mandates. That must be explicit. It cannot be
an optional extra.

If peace operations are mandated to explicitly
prevent sexual violence, they should be resourced to
be successful. Expecting peace operations to do more
and more with less and less is wrong and morally
indefensible. If peace operations are to be strong enough
to prevent systemic sexual Violence, peacekeepers
should possess the skills and the resources. Those
include specialized medical support for victims of
sexual violence in conflict, access to safe areas and
especially support across the United Nations system.
Missions must be able to record and document sexual
violence. Resourcing peace operations sufficiently will
make them fit for purpose in responding to conflicts
where sexual violence is increasingly becoming a
weapon of war.

The Security Council needs to bring systematic
sexual violence into its sanctions regime. Evidence and
documentation are so vital to that. Systematic sexual
violence often continues well into the post-conflict
phase. Nothing makes the case for women to be at the
peace table more powerfully than that. Women need to
in peace processes, at the peace table and in all phases
of peacebuilding.

This morning all the briefers told us about the
urgent need for a resolute international response.
Resolution 2467 (2019), just adopted by the Council,
is a great step forward. The United Nations system as
a whole can and must go much further. We must be on
the right side of history.

