Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes the
thorough briefing provided by the Secretary-General
and the presentation by Ambassador Wittig on behalf
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The need for
increased cooperation with the Peacebuilding
Commission has consistently been stressed by the
Council. This debate is an opportunity to deepen our
cooperation with the PBC in order to capitalize on its
capacity to marshal the actors and resources necessary
to realizing the objectives of peace articulated here in
the Security Council.

The reports before us today mark a critical
turning point in the United Nations strategy for peace
and security. The in-depth analysis contained in the
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2010/386) dovetails with the proposals in
the report on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466). Nigeria welcomes the renewed emphasis
on the nexus between peacekeeping, peacebuilding,
security and development, and we understand the
challenges faced by women in relation to conflict, as
well as the invaluable contribution they can make to
the establishment of peace.

The Secretary-General's report sets out a detailed
model for cementing peace in fragile States in a
manner that reaffirms the key role that women can play
in re-establishing the fabric of recovering societies. His
proposals for a more gender-responsive approach to
peacebuilding, encompassing access to justice and
participation in post-conflict planning and governance,
duly prioritize the needs and capabilities of women in
the peacebuilding context.

It is encouraging to note that, as set out in
document S/2010/386, the Secretary-General's
perspective on peacebuilding encompasses the breadth
and depth of its component parts. Nigeria agrees that
peacebuilding efforts must address peace and security,
human rights, development and the humanitarian
pillars of the United Nations. It will add a broader
dimension to that list of priorities, within which respect
for the rule of law; combating the illicit arms trade,
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime; and
the restoration of core Government functions must also
be supported.

The steady embedding of system-wide coherence
and positive steps towards reliable funding are sure to
benefit the peacebuilding work of the United Nations
and its partners. The work that has gone into
harnessing the right calibre of human capital within the
United Nations system is commendable, and we are
encouraged by the new measures to strengthen
leadership and accountability. Yet there are so many
interconnected parts to this process that we must
remember that a chain is only as strong as its weakest
link. Therefore, it is important to enhance our
capabilities at every point of need in the system.

Resource allocation is a difficult issue at the best
of times, requiring careful and thoughtful priority-
setting. Document S/2010/386 observes that, in the

case of a number of United Nations missions and
peacebuilding offices, the lack of pre-mandate funding
slows progress and is detrimental to the
implementation of critical transitional mandates. In a
number of countries, including Somalia, we have
witnessed the social and political costs of not matching
the expressed will of the international community with
adequate resources. While recognizing that this issue is
not within the specific purview of the Security Council,
we look forward to the proposals to be submitted by
the Secretary-General to the General Assembly on this
issue.

The question of funding and resourcing in general
is also critical from the perspective of women in
peacebuilding. In order to have a real impact on the
lives of women and the post-conflict societies they live
in, United Nations agencies should be adequately
resourced. In that way, we might provide women and
girls with effective resources and protections as victims
of violent conflict. Our work can also empower and
engage women as protagonists of peace within the
United Nations system and as political and civil society
participants.

There is clearly a need to enhance the
mobilization of resources for initiatives to mainstream
women in peacebuilding activities in order to address
their peacebuilding needs, advance gender equality and
empower them in peacebuilding contexts. Nigeria
pledges its support for the newly created United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women. In this regard, we look
forward to its full engagement in promoting the role of
women in peacebuilding and in advocating for the
active participation of women at all levels of decision-
making and post-conflict planning.

Nigeria takes comfort in the recognition that
national ownership of peacebuilding processes is vital,
and welcomes the reports' recognition of the United
Nations as facilitator in an explicitly supporting role.
In situations of crisis, most States in conflict lack
national capacities. Efforts should therefore be made to
ensure that, as we strengthen national ownership, the
same is done for national capacity development.
Against this background of support, national
Governments should be given predictable assistance by
the international community.

Given the complexity of the threats to peace we
now face, there is an even greater imperative for the
coordination of responses. A clear division of labour
and accountability must be agreed on, buttressed by a
common strategic framework and aligned with the
objectives of each peacebuilding exercise. The
Secretary-General's proposal for focal points for each
thematic area of peacebuilding is a solid starting point
in this regard.

In addition, I wish to emphasize the critical need
for collaboration and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations within the geographical
zones of the countries on the PBC agenda. The
contributions of the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union in peacebuilding
in their various regions are legion.

We welcome the seven action points identified
the report of the Secretary-General on the participation
of women in peacebuilding (S/2010.466). They capture
the core gaps in our efforts to promote the full and
equal participation of women in post-conflict
peacebuilding, as envisaged in resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1889 (2009). Nigeria commends the Secretary-
General for homing in on the required actions in such
considered detail. We feel strongly that, if correctly
implemented, this action plan will go a long way
towards actualizing the aims of resolution 1889 (2009).

The two reports before us today give the Security
Council an opportunity to lead the way in inclusive
peacebuilding measures that address the needs of all
segments of society, thereby laying the foundation for
enduring peace. We welcome the adoption of the
presidential statement and express the hope that,
together, we can enhance the United Nations capacity
to make peace a prominent feature in the lives of all
those we serve.

