Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to thank
Spain for its initiative in launching this high-level
review of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Portugal welcomes and greatly appreciates the open
debate format, which has allowed States - members
and non-members of the Security Council alike - and
representatives of United Nations institutions and civil
society to participate in this renewed opportunity to
further advance the women and peace and security
agenda.

From the outset, Portugal has been a strong and
consistent supporter of the women and peace and
security agenda in order to address the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on women and girls and
enhance their participation in peace processes. We
were therefore very pleased to co-sponsor resolution
2242 (2015), adopted by the Council yesterday.

In 2009, Portugal adopted its first national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
and a second edition of the plan for 2014-2018 was
approved last year. During our term in the Security
Council in 2011-2012, the women and peace and security
agenda ranked high among our priorities. We were then
and remain now firm supporters of mainstreaming the
women and peace and security agenda in all Security
Council resolutions, as we are very convinced that
women should be involved in all aspects of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and post-conflict
processes. We also joined other Security Council
members in organizing Arria Formula meetings whose
purpose was to give voice to women's organizations
and raise awareness among Security Council members
on women's specific needs in conflict-affected settings.

As a current member of the Human Rights Council,
Portugal is deeply committed to addressing the plight
of women and girls affected by armed conflict. The
achievements over the last 15 years are significant and
should be duly acknowledged and very much welcomed,
as the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) indicates. Nevertheless, as the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/716) also highlights,
obstacles remain and worrying trends have emerged.
This reality requires and deserves a renewed, shared
commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda.

In that regard, and to mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Portugal
commits to promoting increased participation by women
in international missions for the strengthening and
maintenance of peace and security, and for humanitarian
aid and crisis management; to continuing to actively
promote the women and peace and security agenda in
the main multilateral forums to which Portugal is a
party, such as the United Nations, the European Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and NATO; to raising awareness in all the relevant
international forums of the importance of establishing
national actions plans for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000); to providing information for
the United Nations indicators in order to track the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and for
relevant documents on the implementation of the
resolution; to conducting training programmes on
gender equality and violence against women and girls,
including sexual violence, gender-based violence and
trafficking in human beings, for national personnel in
the field of justice and for members of the armed and
security forces assigned to international peacekeeping
missions; to including the women and peace and security
agenda in Portuguese development aid programmes;
and, finally, to continuing to engage with civil society
organizations on women and peace and security agenda
issues.

