Mr. Ellinger (Czech Republic): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
open debate.

The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Anto'nio
Guterres for his valuable report (S/2018/250) and strong
commitment to implementing the agenda of preventing
sexual violence in conflict and introducing new
initiatives to make changes on the ground. I would also
like to thank his Special Representative Pramila Patten
for her extensive work and her dedication.

The Czech Republic is deeply concerned about
the persistent occurrence of sexual and gender-based
violence in reported countries. We should step up
our efforts to put an end to the climate of impunity.
Initiatives at a high political level should be translated
into concrete actions in order to ensure that the concept
of accountability is fully implemented on the ground.

The Czech Republic remains determined to help to
combat sexual and gender-based violence in conflict
and post-conflict countries. In partnership with
non-governmental organizations, the Czech Republic
is implementing projects aimed at preventing sexual
violence and the abuse of women and girls, including
by setting up health-care and hygiene centres for
marginalized and abused girls and internally displaced
persons in Syria, Lebanon, Yemen, Libya, South Sudan
and Iraq, as well as in Pakistan, Jordan and Bangladesh.

We believe that the culture of violence is related
to socioeconomic factors and arises where various
groups are marginalized. The Czech Republic
therefore addresses the root causes of inequalities
in societies by implementing projects aimed at the
economic empowerment of women and their equal
participation in public and political affairs. Such
projects are implemented in Georgia, Zambia, Ethiopia,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.

The report of the Secretary-General affirms that
cases of sexual and gender-based violence remain
underreported, The equal participation of women
and men in law enforcement agencies creates an
environment that is more conducive to reporting those
serious crimes. The Czech Republic has therefore
become a lead nation of the Jordan III Trust Fund - a
capacity-building project to assist servicewomen in the
Jordanian armed forces.

In January 2017, the Czech Republic adopted a
national action plan on women and peace and security.
The plan contains specific measurable tasks, including
measures to combat conflict-related sexual violence, as
well as all forms of violence and discrimination against
women, girls, men and boys, as a violation of human
rights. In 2015, the Czech Ministry of Defence adopted
its own action plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000). In line with the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, such training
is obligatory for peacekeepers beforejoining the United
Nations or other international peacekeeping missions.

In terms of enforcing accountability, the Czech
Republic continues to support the International
Criminal Court and ad hoc international tribunals.
The Czech Republic supports the global gender
activities of UN-Women through regular voluntary
financial contributions.

As a candidate country to the Human Rights
Council in the elections this autumn, we remain
committed to advancing the empowerment of women,
gender equality and access to justice. Let me affirm
that the Czech Republic remains strongly committed
to preventing and to protecting women, girls, men and
boys from falling victim to such terrible crimes.

