Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): My delegation joins
others in congratulating you, Mr. President, on calling
this debate on women and peace and security. We also
appreciate statements made earlier by Ms. Angela King
and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer. On this subject we are happy
to share the thoughts of the President of the Republic
of Rwanda, Mr. Paul Kagame, and all the members of
the Cabinet, especially the Minister for Gender and
Women in Development, who all strongly speak out in
favour of empowering women for durable peace and
sustainable development. Peace is a prerequisite for
sustainable development, and women have a lot to
oflbn

In most African traditional societies and modern
societies throughout the world, solidarity with one
another has been the best chance for peace and
security. Such solidarity is gradually shaped and built
from the early days of our lives, and we owe this
acquisition to mothers - and fathers of course -
whoever we may be and wherever we may be from.
The focal point for all family life is the wife, the
mother, the "she citizen" of the world. Unfortunately,
what she offers and gives is not always what she gets in
return when wars and calamities break out. The time is
right for her to have a say in this at all levels and in all
institutions.
All hardships and abuses befall her, but she never
gives up. Stories from Rwanda teach us all that when
political and ethnic tensions cause conflict, women
have come as one to suggest building bridges rather
than walls. The Security Council has done well, but it
could do better; it can help women in knocking walls
down and building bridges between people and
cultures. In post-genocide Rwanda, women still carry
the burden of responsibility and caring for their
children, orphans, the elderly and husbands in prisons.
Women have assumed the entire role of breadwinners
and are shouldering multiple challenges despite the fact
that 54 per cent are illiterate, and the majority of them
live below the poverty line.

Those who made women widows in Rwanda, in
Burundi and in the Balkans and those who raped them
and left them with infections, diseases and
consequences of all sorts, including unwanted
pregnancies and HIV/AIDS, are still at large and
active. They are killing and raping more women and
girls across borders, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in Burundi and elsewhere, under the silence of
many who, contrariwise, should arrest them according
to several Security Council resolutions and the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide that we all signed. Instead, these
criminals curiously still enjoy the world's attention,
especially those in Arusha and in Rwanda's prisons or
in big cities of the world. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, they cease to be what they are -
meaning criminals, rapists and killers - the day they
agree to join the ranks of the Kabila forces and his
allies, who are creating more havoc when peace and
security are at stake. And this body seems powerless to
take timely and decisive action.

Adding insult to injury, the agony is still not over
for those women who were victims of rape as a weapon
of genocide. As witnesses at the International Tribunal
for Rwanda in Arusha, they are indeed compelled to
tell their stories in an all-male environment - the
judges, the interpreters and everyone else are all men.
More attention should be drawn to this situation and it
should be swiftly addressed by the Council if peace and
security are for all, including women victims of rape as
a weapon of genocide. Let competent women - and
there are many - be recruited and do the job. We
cannot accept double standards even if we have to live
with them.

My delegation reiterates that the presence of such
criminals in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
continues to be a threat to the security of our people
and to our sovereignty. Rwanda is in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to stop them from killing and
raping more innocent women, girls and children.
Rwanda is there to get them and many of those taken
hostages back. It does so within the framework of the
Lusaka Agreement framework, as negotiated and
agreed by all parties, welcomed by the Council and,
thus far, not changed by any United Nations resolution,
as wrongly stated by the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In September alone
- in one month - we were blessed to get back to
Rwanda from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
17,000 of our people - women, children and men.
And we will continue to get them back to where they
belong, within the law. The international community
should encourage and contribute to this effort as a
genuine search for peace and security rather than
keeping quiet and dwelling on non-priority issues. We
take this opportunity to thank the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for the
assistance given to us and to the returnees who are
being reintegrated into their societies, as over a million
others have been since November 1996.

Against this picture of continued inaction by the
international community, and this body in particular, as
regards the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and the region - although I know efforts are
being made - women have come together to form
associations nationally and regionally and, with the
assistance of our Government, have established
women's councils and have elected representatives
from villages to the national level for the first time ever
in the history of Rwanda. Peace-building is high on the
agenda of women in their various development
activities. We encourage them to continue because they
are right and because it is the right thing to do. Women
have indeed understood that there is no possible
development activity if there is no peace at home and
across our borders. Peace and security are the prime
responsibility of this body, and women have a right to
be involved, especially where we men have failed.
They have proved they can do it. Let us involve them
and empower them.

Namibia has done a great job in promoting
advocacy for women, and we once again congratulate
Namibia and its leadership. Rwanda, on her part, has
hosted two international conferences on women and
peace. The first one, the Pan-African Conference of
Peace, Gender and Development, was organized in
March 1997, and the Kigali Declaration was adopted
under the auspices of the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU). The second one, which took place in
June, was entitled Women as Partners for Peace. It was
organized by the current Ambassador of the United
States to Rwanda and his extended team, to whom we
express our sincere thanks and congratulations. The
conclusions and recommendations of all these
conferences whether in Kampala, Dakar, Johannesburg,
Kigali or Windhoek, should be translated into action to
make sure that women get what they deserve and on
time.

In a bid to promote peace and security, Rwandan
women have undertaken various other important
activities that are worth mentioning and from which we
could learn. First, a programme called Action
Campaign for Peace was launched by Pro-Femme
Twese Hamwe, an umbrella organization that brings
together Rwandan women's non-governmental
organizations. Secondly, a peace village was built by
the Rwandan Women's Alliance and Solidarity
(ASOFERWA), which supports genocide widows; the
village is dedicated to and named after the former
President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela. Thirdly,
because of such peace initiatives the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
awarded Rwandan women a prize for peace and
tolerance in 1997. Fourthly, in a bid to contribute in the
area of resolving conflicts and promoting peace in the
region, Rwanda hosted the international conference to
which I referred earlier, under the auspices of the OAU
and the Economic Commission for Africa.

This Rwandan experience and many others in the
region and beyond speak to the Council and should be
given attention. In the search for peace and security for
all, one of the best strategies for conflict prevention is
to extend the role of women as peacemakers from the
village council in the hinterland of any given country
Member of this Organization, to this very Chamber
where peace and security are supposed to be ensured
for all, without any distinction. The distance to be
covered seems too long, but we are sure to reach the
final objective if we empower women and take them on
board.

As rightly expressed in Africa by President
Kagame on 25 June 2000, when opening the
conference entitled Women as Partners for Peace,
"The twentieth century failed to
acknowledge the role of women in conflict
resolution and the search for peace. Yet
everybody knows that when there is war, the
heaviest toll falls on women and children. It is
now time to bridge this gap because without the
involvement of our mothers, sisters and daughters
within and outside our borders, we cannot find
lasting peace. For a long time, women have been
relegated to the periphery of political activities.
Governments have to put in place policy
instruments and institutions which will enable
women to play an important role in the area of
peace, reconciliation and conflict resolution It
is not only wars that undermine peace. Human
rights abuses, social injustice, poverty and bad
governance are some of the factors that should be
examined in order to tackle conflict on several
fronts."

In conclusion, the Rwanda Government's
commitment to increase the participation of women in
creating and promoting peace should guide the Council
and its membership to adequately address the issue of
peace and security by involving women. They have
experiences to share and a clear, strong will to destroy
all myths and prejudices around and against them. The
Council needs to be gender-sensitive as many of us
here have become, but also, and especially, needs to act
to bring women to the negotiating table in order to help
us to reach the lasting peace and security for which we
long.

