Mr. Begec (Turkey): At the outset, let me reiterate
once again our words of condemnation, condolence and
solidarity to the Russian and German delegations with
regard to the latest terrorist attacks.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/949) and our briefers for their presentations.
Turkey welcomes the adoption today of resolution
2331 (2016). We also welcome the participation of
the President of the Government of Spain, Mr. Rajoy
Brey's, in today's discussion.

Human trafficking constitutes a violation of human
rights and an offence to the dignity and integrity of
human beings. It is also a form of serious transnational
organized crime, which bears immense costs on the
social and economic fabric of our societies. The grave
scale of the humanitarian emergencies, the majority
of which are man-made conflicts, is increasing the
number ofvulnerable people. The rising trends in forced
displacement is heightening the risks for the human
trafficking of those displaced. Women and children are
particularly more affected by these developments.

Meanwhile, the expanding human mobility,
which is essentially a positive contribution to our
globalized word, brings together new challenges and
responsibilities. For this we should better coordinate
our efforts against migrant smuggling and human
trafficking. The use of human trafficking by terrorist
organizations, such as Da'esh, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab in conflict zones, is truly worrying. In
connection to this, the nexus between conflict-related
sexual violence and human trafficking needs to be
better understood.

Turkey remains strongly committed to eradicating
human trafficking. As a transnational threat, it requires
a commensurate and collective response. To this end,
Turkey introduced numerous administrative and legal
measures in combating human trafficking through
prevention, protection, prosecution and cooperation.
At the international level, Turkey is a party to the
Palermo Convention and its supplementary protocols.
At the domestic level, our efforts are focused on two
tracks: enhancing our legislation and improving the
implementation of our obligations. The National Task
Force on the Fight against Human Trafficking was
established in 2002, and so far two national action plans
in the fight against human trafficking were developed
and put into practice. These plans aim to achieve the
implementation of international standards in the fight
against human trafficking, eradicate the phenomenon
in Turkey and strengthen relevant institutions
through enhancing harmonization with the European
Union acquis.

More recently, a regulation on combatting human

trafficking and the protection of victims was published
in the Official Gazette in March. In order to implement
this in a more effective way, the Department for the
Protection of Victims of Human Trafficking was
established under the Ministry of the Interior. The
Department is responsible for combatting human
trafficking and the protection of victims through the
implementation of various projects. One example is
a helpline for victims of human trafficking, which
was developed in cooperation with the International
Organization for Migration. Another example is the
dual services, entitled "Victim Support Programme"
and "Voluntary and Safe Return Programme", which
aim to better assist the victims of human trafficking.

In order to address trafficking in the context of
displacement, we should recalibrate our ongoing efforts
in line with the commitments that we have undersigned
in the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants.
As the biggest refugee hosting country, with over
3 million Syrians and Iraqis, Turkey is undertaking
the necessary measures to prevent human trafficking
among those who already fled the horrors of conflict.

We welcome the strong condemnation in today's
resolution of the activities of Da'esh related to human
trafficking and sexual and gender-based violence.
Turkey remains one of the primary targets of Da'esh's
threat and recently faced the most ruthless form of its
terrorism. In line with relevant Council resolutions, we
have taken comprehensive and effective measures to
combat Da'esh's finances and disrupt and prevent this
Organization from raising, moving and using funds.

We thank Spain for contributing to the Council's
work on trafficking in persons by organizing this
debate. Due to its unique geographical location and the
proximity to today's conflicts, Turkey will continue
to display a decisive and progressive approach to
human trafficking.

