Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening today's open debate and
for its leadership and commitment with respect to this
important issue.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

In recent years, the problem ofhuman trafficking in
conflict situations has become more exacerbated, both
in scope and nature. We are witnessing an increasing
number of conflicts, and, unfortunately, human
trafficking has become a regular feature and by-product
of armed conflicts. Trafficking in persons in conflict
situations has therefore reached an unprecedented scale.

In order to address the problem of human trafficking
in conflict situations, the international community
needs to focus simultaneously on prevention, protection
and prosecution.

First, preventing violent conflict from occurring
in the first place is the best guarantee to avert human
trafficking from happening. That is one of the many
reasons why Estonia fully supports the Secretary-
General's emphasis on shifting from reaction to
prevention. We commend his efforts to improve the
United Nations capacity to take early action to prevent
violent conflict and link the reform of the United
Nations peace and security architecture with the
reform of the United Nations development system. The
United Nations needs to fulfil its core functions more
effectively and in a more coherent manner.

Secondly, the international community needs to
scale up protection efforts to ensure that those affected
by conflict situations, especially women and girls,
do not become vulnerable to traffickers. To achieve
this, Estonia calls for better coordination among
stakeholders and institutions. The Security Council
could lead this process and foster greater normative,
operational and strategic coherence across the United
Nations system on the topic by engaging directly with
relevant United Nations mandate holders, including the
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, and the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and
its consequences, the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
for Children and Armed Conflict, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
relevant agencies.

Thirdly, there must be no room for impunity, and
all perpetrators must be held accountable. While the
problem of trafficking is international in nature and
therefore requires an international response, we must
not forget that the primary responsibility for bringing
those responsible tojustice lies with the States. National
policy and action programmes, including efforts to train
immigration authorities, police forces, prosecutors and
judges, are crucial to eradicating human trafficking.

While most countries have adopted legislation
criminalizing human trafficking, attention still needs
to be directed to enforcement. Accordingly, the States
themselves and the international community must
take action to prevent the culture of impunity from
spreading. Furthermore, victims must have access to
adequate assistance, support and effective remedies.

It is important for the international community to
continue its efforts aimed at tackling and preventing
the activities of armed groups, terrorist groups and
transnational organized crime groups that are involved
in human trafficking, forced labour and modern slavery.
Estonia believes that trafficking in persons in conflict
situations must and can be eradicated. But to reach
this goal, the fight needs to be stepped up. We remain
ready to actively participate in future discussions to
shape the international community's response to this
global threat.

