Mr. Moura (Portugal): I would like to thank
Nigeria for convening this open debate on women and
peace and security, with a particular focus on sexual
violence in conflict, an issue to which Portugal attaches
great importance. I also wish to warmly congratulate
Ms. Zainab Bengura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, on
the excellent work she has been carrying out.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement made this
morning by the observer of the European Union, but
I should like to make a few remarks in my national
capacity.

While acknowledging that important progress has
been made in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security, we need to recognize
that significant challenges remain. Women are still
underrepresented at the several levels of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts, just as they are inadequately
represented in formal peace negotiations. The exclusion
of women from peace talks and peacebuilding efforts
often means that insufficient attention is paid to
addressing women's needs and concerns in the post-
conflict phase, thereby reinforcing a circle ofinequality
and marginalization. Moreover, the abuse of the rights
of women and girls is a dominant feature of conflict,
and sexual violence is often widespread and systematic
both in conflict and in periods of political instability.

Sexual violence and rape are prevalent in regions
of war as well as in refugee camps. Violence against
women, including rape and sexual slavery, is often
used as a weapon of warfare in order to dehumanize
women themselves or the communities to which
they belong. Importantly, high levels of sexual and
gender-based violence also rarely cease at the end of
hostilities and continue well into the post-conflict
phase. The costs of sexual and gender-based violence
are largely underestimated and ignored. Such violence
is surrounded by a culture of silence and impunity,
and the range and complexity of the underlying causes
make it a difficult issue to address, particularly in
conflict-affected contexts where judicial and security
institutions are weak.

Durable peace and reconciliation are heavily
compromised if the perpetrators of such acts are not
prosecuted. Impunity for perpetrators and insufficient
response to the needs of survivors are unacceptable. The
grave violations of women's human rights through mass
rape and other sexual violence require the immediate
attention of such organizations as the International
Criminal Court and other relevant tribunals.
Furthermore, international and national courts should
have adequate resources, access to gender expertise,
gender training for all staff, and gender-sensitive
programmes in order to more effectively prosecute
those responsible for such crimes.

Further prompt action on the part of all actors
is necessary to change the reality on the ground
for women and girls at risk of becoming victims of
Violence or already affected. We need to redouble our
efforts, notably in the fight against impunity. Often,
in the name of peace amnesty is given to combatants
who had used sexual violence as a tactic of war. We
believe that there can be no sustainable peace without
justice for victims; targeted and graduated measures
should be imposed against all parties to a conflict that
are responsible for grave violations of women's rights.
Perpetrators, including commanders who commission
or condone the use of sexual violence, should be held
accountable.

On these matters, zero tolerance has to be the
rule. We also need to strengthen support networks to
ensure that survivors of violence can return to take an
active part in public life, especially in peacebuilding
efforts. And we need to work with UN-Women and the
United Nations country team partners to help countries
to develop national action plans to coordinate the
implementation of all women and peace and security
resolutions.

Women have indeed a crucial role to play in
rebuilding war-torn societies and in preserving social
cohesion. They did it in Europe during and after two
world wars; they did it in South America; and they
have done it in Africa in countries divided by civilian
strife. They still do it on a daily basis in several
countries tormented by conflict. What is essential is to
guarantee that women are included in peace processes
and to ensure that their perspectives, direct knowledge
of the concrete situation and concerns are taken into
account as important contributions to the reshaping
of torn societies in post-conflict situations and in
peacebuilding efforts.
To conclude, Portugal has been striving to support
the promotion and protection of the human rights of
women and their political participation. In this context,
my country reaffirms its commitment to ensuring
women's effective participation in peace and security
and to translate this commitment into enhanced action.

