Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): May I begin by
thanking Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Gender Issues and Advancement
of Women, Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Ines Alberdi, of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women, and
Ms. Sarah Taylor, of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security. Their contributions to this
meeting have been invaluable.

I have the honour to address the Security Council
today on behalf of the member States of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), namely,
Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Zambia and my own
country, South Africa.

SADC takes this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his report contained in document
S/2008/622, which provides an assessment of measures
taken to enhance the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace and security. We also
take note of the assessment on the progress made in the
protection of women against sexual and gender-based
violence. The report also refers to resolution 1820
(2008) on sexual violence in conflict situations, which
was unanimously adopted by the Council not long ago.

While women may be the first casualties of war,
they remain active agents of change and play a
meaningful role in the recovery and reintegration of
their families. Women are also instrumental in bringing
about democracy and reconciliation in post-conflict
societies. It is for that reason that SADC welcomes this
opportunity, on the eighth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), to participate in this open
debate on the theme of "Women's equal participation
and full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security". This meeting
provides us yet another opportunity to assess the
concrete and specific efforts made in the
implementation of the resolution at all levels and the
role of the Security Council in such efforts.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
is one of the founding principles of SADC and is
enshrined in the SADC Treaty of 1992. We have been
greatly honoured by the leadership and important
contributions of women in recent peace processes and
negotiations in our region. We also take pride in the
fact that, throughout our history, the women of
Southern Africa have played a pivotal role in the
liberation movements that brought about independence
and democracy to many of our countries.

In our resolve to mainstream a gender perspective
into all aspects of our lives, SADC heads of State
signed the SADC Protocol on Gender and
Development on 17 August 2008. That instrument has
been hailed as an important step towards the
empowerment of women, the elimination of
discrimination and the achievement of gender equality
and equity. In the context of peace and security, the
Protocol stipulates that States parties shall endeavour
to put in place measures to ensure that women enjoy
representation and participation in key decision-
making positions in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes by 2015, in accordance with
resolution 1325 (2000).

Furthermore, the Protocol specifies that, in time
of armed conflict, States parties shall take such steps as
are necessary to prevent and eliminate incidents of
human rights abuses, especially of women and
children, and ensure that the perpetrators of such
abuses are brought to justice before a court of
competent jurisdiction. Sexual violence in conflict
situations is inextricably linked to gender inequality.
We therefore need to advocate more strongly for the
equal participation and full involvement of women in
all efforts aimed at maintaining and promoting peace
and security.

While SADC acknowledges that women and civil
society organizations have been the driving force
behind our efforts and achievements, we are committed
to continue to strengthen efforts to address the
challenges of peace and security for women. We
therefore welcome the seriousness with which the
Security Council continues to address the question. In
that connection, SADC believes that there is a need for
women's increased representation and participation at
all levels, particularly in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding and within United Nations field-based
operations. Recommendations by the Security Council -
such as to provide gender-sensitive training, establish
gender components in peacekeeping operations, deploy
more women peacekeepers and appoint more women as
special representatives and special envoys of the
Secretary-General - should be implemented. SADC
urges the Secretary-General to strengthen his efforts to
identify suitable female candidates for senior positions,
including in the military and police services. In
addition, Member States should nominate women
candidates for inclusion in a regularly updated
centralized roster, as called for by resolution 1325
(2000).

From our experience in SADC, we have learned
that it is important to build solidarity among all
stakeholders, particularly women. We therefore remain
committed to working within a consultative and
collaborative framework to find peaceful solutions to
conflicts. To that end, we believe it would be important
for women in local communities to be allowed to
participate in finding solutions for the reconstruction
and rebuilding of their countries. The equal need for
the representation and participation of women in
formal peace processes and at the negotiating table
cannot be overemphasized. As the ones who are the
first to suffer when there is conflict, women are often
the ones who know when and how to rebuild the lives
of their communities. Women should therefore be at
the forefront of developing and implementing post-
conflict strategies and programmes.

In conclusion, I wish to state that SADC remains
committed to the full and effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We, as the international
community, have an obligation to women the world
over to ensure that their rights are promoted and their
place in all aspects of the peace process is assured. It is
their equal participation and their full involvement that
will contribute to the effective maintenance and
promotion of sustainable peace and security.

