Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this important
meeting, which enables us to assess the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). I should also like to thank
the countries - particularly Germany and the
Netherlands - that had the good will to be represented
at the ministerial level at this meeting, thus
emphasizing the importance of the subject under
consideration.

The briefings presented by Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno and Ms. Amy Smythe at the beginning of
our discussion were extremely useful, because both
speakers refused to employ the jargon sometimes used
in this field. Their view of the reality on the ground is
not complacent, but also not resigned. I thank them for
their recommendations, and - as the representative of
China just said - the Security Council should take
those recommendations seriously into account and
follow up on them.

As a country associated with the European Union
(EU), Bulgaria aligns itself fully with the statement to
be made later by the representative of Italy - which
holds the presidency - on behalf of the Union.

The adoption three years ago of resolution 1325
(2000) clearly represented a significant success in the
international community's efforts to ensure that the
role of women in preventing and resolving armed
conflicts is not underestimated. The resolution provides
a very important legal framework for action by the
Council, but we should not stop there. It must be said
that the results of its implementation are meagre
indeed.

Women and children still constitute the majority
of civilian victims of armed conflict. They are
subjected to every form of violence and trafficking, a
situation that can no longer be tolerated.

Women are not just victims of violence. They are
often the driving force for peace. Here I think of two
personal experiences which greatly impressed me
during Security Council missions to conflict areas. The
first was in Bunia, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where the mission met the President of the Ituri
interim assembly, Ms. Petronille Vaweka, an
extraordinary woman whose courage and determination
impressed all the members of the Council who took
part in that mission. She is an example of how a
courageous woman of great moral stature can help her
fellow citizens. Meeting her was an unforgettable
experience for me. Secondly, an image comes to mind
of a meeting of the Security Council mission in
Mitrovica, Kosovo, with a local Serbian women's
organization, whose wisdom and willingness to help
the inhabitants of that divided city and bring them
together impressed everyone.

Those personal recollections prompt me to think
of one very important aspect of the activities of the
Security Council, and the United Nations in general, in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000): very close
cooperation with women's organizations and networks,
which exist in all conflict areas. Such cooperation has
proved to be very useful. We need to move forward
along those lines. I believe that peacekeeping missions
are becoming increasingly aware of this and are
benefiting from it more and more.

It is also important for women to participate at all
stages in peace negotiations - preparation, planning,
decision-making and implementation. Women should
be the subjects, not just the objects, of peace efforts.

In conclusion, I emphasize that Bulgaria hopes
that the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) will be
implemented on the ground in all the missions that the
Council establishes and provides with a mandate.

