Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir,
for organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians. I also thank Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Helen
Durham, Director for International Law and Policy
of the International Committee of the Red Cross;
and Ms. Ilwad Elman of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, for their respective
briefings earlier this morning.

As the United Nations is celebrating its seventieth
anniversary this year, we recall that our Organization
was founded on the determination to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person. Since the creation of the
United Nations, the Security Council adopted a number
of resolutions and strategies to protect civilians in
conflict, including the landmark resolution 1265 (1999).
Nonetheless, while the international community, and
the United Nations in particular, has adopted an array
of strategies to improve and implement protection-of-
civilians mandates, we are extremely concerned by the
increasing number of conflicts around the world and
the frequent targeting of civilians, including women
and children.

Over the years, the world has witnessed armed
conflicts marked by systematic violence and mass
atrocities against civilians. While the protection-of-
civilians agenda has evolved to become the core
mandate of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the increasing violence against civilians has tested
the fundamental principles and capabilities of those
operations and demonstrated that much remains to
be done. Experience on the ground, however, has
demonstrated that peacekeeping operations that are ill-
prepared, with no adequate means to address large-scale
violence directed against civilians, will falter and may
even collapse.

Often there exists a gap between the expectations
of the civilian protection and the actual military
capabilities of peacekeepers. We believe that threats
to civilians and the ways of addressing them should
inform mission mandates, strategies, structures and the
allocation ofresources. In that respect, as a follow-up to
the high-level summit on peacekeeping operations held
last September on the margins of the general debate
of the General Assembly, Rwanda will organize, on
28 and 29 May in Kigali, an international conference on
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts to further
reflect on how to better implement the protection
mandates of peacekeeping missions.

Today, peacekeepers and other key actors who are
supposed to provide protection to civilians in armed
conflicts often struggle to deliver on the promise of
the protection of civilians, embodied in the very heart
of the Charter of the United Nations. In the Great
Lakes region, for example, we are unfortunately still
facing roaming predators against civilians, mainly
the so-called Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda (FDLR). Indeed, this genocidaire movement
continues to use civilians as human shields, forcefully
recruit children and rape and sexually abuse women
and girls. Given this dark picture, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo need to show more
commitment in the neutralization of the FDLR, in
accordance with the relevant decisions of the region
and the relevant resolutions of the Council. Four weeks
after the expiration of the deadline given to the FDLR
for peaceful disarmament, we believe that the time for
announcements, communication and tough talk has
passed. This is the time for action.

The conflict in South Sudan also reveals serious
protection gaps that require immediate attention. The
situation in Syria and Iraq have gone from bad to worse
with terrorist activities by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), which commits the worst sorts
of human rights violations against civilians, including
journalists and humanitarian workers. As difficult as
the situation might be, we believe that the international
community still has a responsibility to use all its
leverage to save those populations in dire need. In that
regard, we commend the role played by the international
coalition against ISIL, led by the United States, which
is in line with our collective responsibility to protect.

On women and peace and security, the Government
of Rwanda considers any violence against women and
girls to be an assault on human dignity. We call for
and support the full implementation of resolutions

1325 (2000) and 1960 (2010), which insist that all
peacekeeping mandates incorporate provisions that
specifically identify steps to address sexual violence.
That should include the clear identification of women's
protection advisers alongside gender advisers and
human rights protection units, as well as a clearly
defined role for women in post-conflict recovery. We
also call for improved monitoring of sexual violence,
and for more effective identification of good practices
and challenges.

In conclusion, let me emphasize, as we did during
the past two years of our membership in the Security
Council, that the best way to protect civilians is to
prevent conflicts in the first place. We call on the
Security Council, the wider United Nations system and
regional and subregional organizations to ensure that
addressing the root causes of conflicts remains at the
top of our collective agenda.

