Ms. Rodriguez Martinez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is grateful to the Plurinational
State of Bolivia for convening this important open
debate and for drafting the concept note to guide
our deliberations today (S/2018/904, annex). We are
also grateful for the Secretary-General's briefing, as
well as that of the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka - whose work has been defining
in the promotion of this agenda - and Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/900)
on the crucial issue before us today concludes that
significant obstacles remain for women to participate
effectively in the maintenance and consolidation
of peace. Humankind continues to witness the
devastating consequences of violations of international
humanitarian law in the armed conflicts that plague the
world today, particularly for women and girls, who are
the first victims of the dramatic consequences of war
and who are also subjected to recurrent and systematic
sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as brutal
gender violence.

Our country is convinced that the participation and
contributions of women at all levels, phases and areas
linked to the prevention and settlement of conflicts
are essential to achieve lasting and sustained peace.
There will be no international peace and security if
women and girls - who constitute more than half of
the population affected by armed conflicts - are not
effectively included and integrated.

Faced with those critical scenarios, it is vital to
have the highest political commitment when the various
national and international bodies come to allocate
resources that are fair, sufficient and predictable, aimed
at eradicating social exclusion and inequality and the
feminization of poverty, and to promote structural
processes ofresilience, institutional capacity and access
to essential benefits for women, addressing not only
their technical training and skills to exercise advocacy
but also the coverage of their basic and security needs.

We reiterate that the full realization of all those
commitments and ideals in favour of women will not
be possible while some States and entities continue to
implement unilateral coercive measures against other
sovereign States for political motives in economic,
commercial and financial terms. We once again
condemn those measures as illegal and in violation of
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, and
because they violate peace and stability and generate
suffering in more than a third of humankind, only
succeeding in pursuing the interventionist agenda and
the war of its promoters.
The United Nations must continue its work
to improve the training of all personnel deployed
in the field and to have a greater presence of
experts - especially women - on gender issues and
advisers on the protection of women in peacekeeping
operations. In that context, we categorically condemn
all incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse
committed in the framework of any peacekeeping
operation, as well as by the military, police or civilian
personnel of the Organization deployed on the ground.
Zero tolerance for those crimes must continue to be a
substantive commitment by the United Nations and the
entire international community in order to continue
working resolutely towards their prevention and to
bring to justice all those responsible for those heinous
and immoral crimes.

We also reiterate our call to all States, entities
and individuals to fully respect the provisions of
international law and the resolutions adopted by this
organ regarding the prohibition of supplying weapons
and providing financial and logistical support to
extremist and terrorist groups, so that there may be an
effective neutralization of their operational capacity and
abhorrent practices of exploitation and sexual violence
against women as an instrument of war and terror.

In conclusion, Venezuela takes this opportunity to
reaffirm its firm belief that women are protagonists and
essential drivers in the struggle for the emancipation of
our peoples. It is therefore incumbent upon us to make
the establishment of the conditions necessary to their
equality and access to equal opportunities a top priority
at the vanguard of inclusive, equitable and transformative
processes of development and peacebuilding.

