Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We would like to
thank the presidency of the Security Council for the
choice of theme for today's open debate. We appreciate
the importance that Germany attaches to the subject,
demonstrated also by the participation of the Federal
Minister of Defence, Ms. Ursula von der Leyen, earlier
today. This meeting provides an important opportunity
to reflect on ways to strengthen collective efforts
towards more efficient and effective peacekeeping by
increasing women's participation and representation.

The Government of Armenia attaches particular
importance to reforms aimed at promoting women's
representation at all decision-making levels. We
firmly believe that peace and security efforts are
more sustainable when women are equal partners in
the prevention of conflicts, the delivery of relief and
recovery efforts, as well as in contributing to lasting and
durable solutions. Ensuring the solid and meaningful
participation of women in conflict resolution processes
is instrumental, as it has been proven to amplify chances
for credible and sustainable peace.

As next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Armenia stands
ready to support the implementation of commitments
for the promotion of the women and peace and security
agenda. We fully support the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative and the efforts undertaken
towards the equal and meaningful participation of
women at all stages of peace processes.

In February this year, the Government of Armenia
adopted a national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The plan was elaborated
through an inclusive and comprehensive process,
involving Government agencies, civil society and
international organizations. The document prioritizes
the enhancement of training and career development
possibilities for women with a view to increasing
their participation in peacekeeping as well as in
peacebuilding activities. A particular focus has been
placed on vulnerable population groups, including
women from border communities and women affected
by conflict.

The involvement of women inpeacekeeping missions
is among the priorities of reforms implemented by the
Armenian armed forces. With the aim of promoting a
greater role played by women, Armenia has already
deployed women peacekeepers to United Nations and
United Nations-mandated operations. More women
will soon be deployed to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon during the next rotation cycle this
summer in order to ensure compliance with the 15 per
cent target set by the United Nations.

Non-governmental organizations and civil society
networks have been instrumental in raising the bar for
women's participation in peace- and security-related
activities. Since 2015, the HALO Trust has been
training and employing local women in its humanitarian
demining missions in the conflict-affected areas of
Nagorno Karabakh. Initiatives like that have multiple
economic, social and humanitarian benefits for local
communities in overcoming the effects of conflict,
towards a more peaceful and secure future.

The outcome document of the seventeenth
Summit of the Heads of State and Government of La
Francophonie, held in Yerevan on 11 and 12 October
2018 under the theme "Living Together", also calls for
continued efforts to ensure the participation of women
in peacekeeping operations and for a greater role for
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Armenia fully recognizes the importance of women's
empowerment and how it is linked and intertwined
with sustainable peace and development efforts at
different levels. An important example of women's
participation in peacebuilding efforts is the Women for
Peace initiative, led by the spouse of the Prime Minister
of Armenia, as an inclusive platform for women and
mothers to promote peace and reconciliation in our
region and beyond.

Armenia is fully committed to the promotion of
gender-sensitive policies as a priority in our national
and foreign policy agenda. As a member of the United
Nations Commission on the Status of Women and
having assumed the chairmanship of the Commission
for the upcoming session, Armenia will be supporting
efforts aimed at ensuring gender equality through the
enhancement of women's participation in all areas of
economic, political and social life, including through
the substantial involvement of women in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping activities.

