Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): For Bangladesh,
the subject of today's deliberations is of topical
importance. We therefore thank the United Kingdom
presidency for convening this meeting, as we thank
others - Under-Secretary-General Guehenno, High
Commissioner Arbour and Executive Director
Obaid - for their informed presentations.

Appreciation is owed to the Secretary-General for
the document at hand (S/2004/814). It is true that entire
communities suffer the consequences of armed
conflict, but the worst sufferers are often women and
girls. That information is derived from simple
empirical observation.

Bangladesh's cultural matrix provides for high
priority with regard to women's issues. That tradition
has pervaded most of our contemporary history. It has
now found fruition in many innovative ideas that help
to empower women. Two examples are microcredit and
non-formal education. We have learned that gender
mainstreaming helps to marginalize extremist thought
and action. It encourages a societal behavioural pattern
that is more value-laden than violent. That is perhaps
one explanation as to why there have been no incidents
connected to international terrorism in Bangladesh.

We have incorporated that value into our foreign
policy as a principle. We are always pleased to share
our experiences with others. That is why Bangladesh
was so closely associated with the development and
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). It
was the Bangladesh presidency that issued a statement
on women and peace, for the first time in the Council,
on International Women's Day in March 2000. That
statement contained a simple thesis. It was that
women's participation is an ingredient essential for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.

We believe that resolution 1325 (2000) is a vital
resolution that has set critical norms. We see that as a
landmark event. It is heartening that the resolution
provides for the integration of gender perspectives into
United Nations programmes related to peace.

Acting in partnership with the United Kingdom
delegation, Bangladesh sponsored a resolution in the
Commission on the Status of Women on mainstreaming
a gender perspective into all policies and programmes
of the United Nations system. While it is true that
Bangladesh and the United Kingdom have many things
in common, in terms of development their levels are
very different. Yet we collaborated on that issue in
order to make the point that gender mainstreaming is a
universal value and that it is as much a concern of the
developing countries as it is of the developed. Our
actions flowed from that belief.

Bangladesh believes that it is, indeed, quite
evident in our society that our investment in women
has contributed enormously to the creation of standards
of pluralism, democracy and human rights. These
ideals are essential components of sustainable peace.
Our peacekeepers - and we are consistently one of the
largest contributors - carry those ideals with them in
conflict-ridden places and distant parts. Our main
reward lies in the universal appreciation of this global
service.

Significant developments have been achieved at
the United Nations with regard to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). Much remains to be done,
however. We need to develop guidelines to ensure that
all peace-related activities include and support the rule
of law and promote gender equality, thus protecting
women's human rights.

Systematic use of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women in post-conflict countries as a guiding
framework would be desirable.
The promotion and protection of the human rights
of women and of girls in armed conflict throughout the
world is a pressing challenge. Their situation -
particularly that of those under foreign occupation,
such as in the occupied Palestinian territories and the
Syrian Golan - remains a matter of grave concern for
us.

There is need for a sustained commitment at all
times to gender justice and women's empowerment.
There must be zero tolerance for crimes against women
and girls in conflict situations. Impunity must be ended
and the perpetrators of crimes brought to justice.

We must uphold the promises we made in
resolution 1325 (2000). Consistent and concerted
action, buttressed by genuine political will, is required
if we are to realize the goals that have been set. Our
aims can thus be achieved through partnerships across
the broadest possible spectrum, including with non-
governmental organizations and other civil society
actors. Thus we could and should move forward from
rhetoric to action and from advocacy to
implementation.

The meeting was suspended at 1.35 p.m.
