Ms. Lisson (Australia): At the outset, I would
like to make clear that an election has been called in
Australia and that the Government is currently
operating under caretaker provisions.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is an
affirmation of the important role of women in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. Women's participation is
crucial to the viability and success of peace talks,
peace agreements, recovery from conflict and long-
term peacebuilding. Women's involvement means that
not only are the serious issues of disarmament and
demobilization addressed, but the equally serious
social and economic issues that are essential to long-
term, sustainable peace, are also dealt with.

Australia recognizes that. In March this year, the
Australian Government launched the new gender
equality policy for the Australian aid programme. This
policy's overall goal is to reduce poverty by advancing
gender equality and empowering women. The policy
sets out what Australia will do and provides sample
results on gender equality that can be incorporated into
Government programmes and initiatives. Two of the
key outcomes the policy targets are the equal
participation of women in decision-making and
leadership, including in fragile States and conflict
situations, and the advancement of gender equality in
regional cooperation efforts. Working towards these
outcomes will help implement resolution 1325 (2000).

Over the past five years, Australia has continued
to fund a number of activities in the Asia-Pacific
region aimed at implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
The people-to-people links forged as a result of these
activities have provided a platform for women's
participation in decision-making for peace and security
at all levels - community, national and regional.

For example, Australia supported the Pacific
Islands Forum Secretariat Regional Workshop on
Gender, Conflict, Peace and Security last year. This
workshop, the first of its kind in the Pacific, was
attended by policymakers, representatives from
military and law enforcement agencies, and women's
nongovernmental organizations from all 16 Pacific
Island Forum countries. The workshop succeeded in
putting the issue of resolution 1325 (2000) on the
regional agenda, and the outcomes are now guiding
follow-up work on gender, peace and security in the
region.

In another example, femLINKpacific, together
with counterparts in a number of Pacific island
countries, is part of a regional women's network on
resolution 1325 (2000). Through assistance provided
by Australia, femLINKpacific's regional media
network has launched a resolution 1325 (2000) website
to assist with the dissemination of information on
resolution 1325 (2000) as widely as possible.
FemLINKpacific has also established a regular
resolution 1325 (2000) e-news bulletin. In addition,
work has started on translating the resolution into local
languages and, for the first time, stories about the
resolution in the Pidgin and Tongan languages are
being featured.

Australia is also funding a regional peace talks
training project, through the International Women's
Development Agency. The project serves to develop a
national framework in three Pacific countries for the
implementation of outcomes, recommendations and
commitments designed to ensure gender equality in
matters relating to peace and security in those
countries.

Further, Australia is contributing towards a
project aimed at mainstreaming gender in policies and
programmes to prevent violence and conflict and to
strengthen post- conflict recovery in the Pacific region.
The project, jointly managed by the United Nations
Development Programme Pacific Centre and the
United Nations Development Fund for Women, will
review existing research on violence reduction and
conflict prevention from a gender perspective;

undertake research in a number of Pacific countries to
address gaps in existing knowledge on issues of
violence and masculinities; and publish, disseminate
and advocate for incorporation of the findings into
work plans and policies of relevant agencies and
organizations throughout the Pacific region.

Projects and ongoing regional dialogue such as
those that I have just outlined increase the availability
of information by and about women's contributions to
improve the peace and security environment, whether
at the local, national or regional level. They are
examples of ways of achieving the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and ensuring that any peace
support operations and security sector reforms are
gender-inclusive.

Australia also continues to actively engage
women in our peacebuilding efforts. Women military,
police and civilian personnel play a key role in our
assistance to United Nations peacekeeping missions
and bilateral and regional endeavours such as the
Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.

In closing, Australia is looking forward to
participating in the discussion on the equal
participation of women in conflict prevention,
management and resolution, and in post-conflict
peacebuilding, which will take place at the United
Nations Commission on the Status of Women session
in 2008. In preparation for this discussion, the
Australian Government is consulting with the
Australian women's sector on measures they have
undertaken to implement resolution 1325 (2000).

