Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): I would
like to thank the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for conveying today's open debate and to thank
today's briefers.

Portugal is encouraged by several very positive
developments with regard to the women and peace
and security agenda, such as the fact that the issue is a
consistent feature in Security Council resolutions and
peacekeeping mandates, as well as the fact that gender-
sensitive reporting is now understood as a fundamental
element for a thorough understanding of the gender
dimensions of conflict and that reinforced efforts are
necessary to shape adequate responses at the local and
international levels. Today more women are included in

peace talks, more peace agreements contain provisions
in support of women's human rights and more security-
sector personnel are trained to prevent and respond to
sexual and gender-based violence.

However, since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the peace and security context and
the nature of conflict have evolved - at times
dramatically - characterized by entrenched cycles of
conflict and fragility, daily violations of human rights
and humanitarian law, growing humanitarian crises,
mass-scale displacement of persons and refugees, and
new threats, such as increasing violent extremism and
terrorism, which disproportionately affect women
and girls.

The women and peace and security agenda is a
critical, yet underutilized, tool for preventing conflict
and shaping more effective responses to today's
complex crises. That is why it is now more than ever
essential to sustain and develop the progress already
achieved and maintain the commitment to the agenda
by Member States, regional organizations and the
entire United Nations system. In that regard, Portugal
welcomes the settomg up of the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security, established pursuant
to the 2015 high-level review, as a key step in the
implementation of resolution 2242 (2015) with a view
to strengthen oversight and coordination on the women
and peace and security agenda. We would also like to
commend Spain for its initiative in the establishment of
the national focal point network for women and peace
and security, which constitutes an important platform
for sharing good practices, and with which Portugal is
pleased to be associated.

Portugal has been a firm and consistent supporter of
the women and peace and security agenda. We adopted
our first national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in 2009, and a second one in
2014, which is in force until 2018. We consider it critical
to ensure the active and meaningful participation of
women and girls in all aspects and stages of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and post-conflict
processes. We will continue to promote the women and
peace and security agenda and to raise awareness on
the importance of establishing national actions plans on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in all the
relevant international forums we belong to, including
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and NATO.

Portugal also reiterates its pledge to continue
conducting training programmes for national personnel
and members of the armed and security forces
assigned to international peacekeeping missions on
gender equality and violence against women and girls,
including sexual violence, gender-based violence and
trafficking in human beings.
I would also like to point out the important role of
civil society organizations in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. They are
often essential elements in preventing and reporting
crimes committed against women, young women and
girls and in alerting the international community to
such crimes. Working in close collaboration with civil
society organizations therefore becomes indispensable
to enhance the results.

In conclusion, 16 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we must redouble our efforts
in consolidating and reinforcing the implementation of
this agenda. Ensuring a gender perspective and women
and girls' participation in all stages ofpeace processes,
including in prevention and disarmament, protection
in displacement settings, peacekeeping, policy-making
and reconstruction, strengthens the protection efforts
by United Nations peacekeepers, contributes positively
to the achievement of sustainable peace, accelerates
economic recovery and development and helps counter
violent extremism.

