Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today's meeting. I take this opportunity to acknowledge
the leadership and eminent work of Ms. Pramila Patten
and her Office, and to thank her for her informative
briefing. I also thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Amal
Clooney, Dr. Denis Mukwege, Ms. Inas Miloud and
Ms. Nadia Murad, to whom I would like to express my
admiration for their struggles and deep convictions. Let
me recall what the Norwegian Nobel Committee said in
its considerations in awarding that defender of women's
rights the Nobel Peace Prize:

"Nadia Murad is herself a victim of war
crimes. She refused to accept the social codes
that require women to remain silent and ashamed
of the abuses to which they have been subjected.
She has shown uncommon courage in recounting
her own sufferings and speaking up on behalf of
other victims."
In analysing the valuable report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/280), we are shocked to note that, even
taking into account the significant advances of the past
10 years, sexual violence remains a cruel scourge and
has even worsened in conflict scenarios.

In anticipation of the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption resolution 1325 (2000) and the tenth
anniversary of the creation of the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, it is even more crucial to
make greater efforts to implement the resolutions of the
Security Council. Sexual violence in conflict is used to
displace communities, as a means ofrepression and as a
tactic of terrorism. We cannot therefore hope to mitigate
or eliminate conflicts if we do not recognize and face
in their full measure the impact and consequences
of these crimes on the search for and maintenance of
peace. There are several urgent aspects in particular
that deserve special attention.

The first is ensuring that victims participate in
decision-making processes so as to ensure that the
initiatives promoted address their concerns fully,
including in post-conflict situations. In this regard,
we applaud the progress of the United Nations Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we hope that
the number of projects in the process of implementation
can be expanded.

Secondly, we must insist on all possible measures
to end impunity for crimes of sexual violence, since
such impunity also generates space for new Violations.
We must therefore support all reforms that increase the
effectiveness of justice systems, such as reforms of legal
frameworks to take these crimes into account, always
ensuring that survivors and witnesses are protected.
Only then will we create the conditions for Victims to
be heard and receive support without being stigmatized.

Thirdly, it is essential to incorporate sexual violence
into the criteria for imposing sanctions and that the
perpetrators of sexual violence listed in the annex to
the report of the Secretary-General on this issue. It is
vital that gender experts be mandated to the sanctions
committees and that the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict report regularly to them.
We consider it essential that the Security Council carry
out missions to conflict areas, concentrating especially
on learning first-hand the concerns of victims of sexual
violence. Likewise, the Informal Expert Group on
Women, Peace and Security is a platform of immense
value in monitoring the compliance of State and
non-State parties to conflict.

Fourthly, it is a priority for victims of sexual
violence to have access to health-care services,
including sexual and reproductive health services,
since we know that women and girls in conflict are
at greater risk of unwanted pregnancies, mortality
maternal, severe sexual and reproductive injury and of
contracting sexually transmitted infections.

For the Government of President Danilo Medina
Senchez, efforts to end gender-based violence and
extend access to sexual and reproductive health
services involve not only access to clinical services
but also protection against forced and early marriage
of boys and girls and all other prejudices resulting
from the backwardness of the patriarchal mentality.
I am referring to primordial components of our
sociopolitical agenda.

Denying women and girls access to sexual and
reproductive health care is exposing them to degrading,
cruel and inhuman treatment, leading only to more
suffering for the victims of sexual violence. I affirm
that for our Government and President Medina, these
are matters of non-negotiable principles, regardless
of the political consequences in terms of criticism or
disagreement on the part of traditional sectors. For
us, the issue of gender is and will be a matter of the
first order - simply, the adaptation of the Dominican
Republic to the modern currents of action and thought
in relation to women, their rights and the respect that
has long been withheld from them.

Finally, we welcome the fact that the Special
Representative is working in coordination with other
United Nations bodies in this regard, and we welcome the
Secretary-General's recommendation to strengthen the
collaboration of regional and subregional organizations
with the United Nations in this area. I wish to highlight
here the goals outlined by the Spotlight Initiative as
an example of a strategic alliance that we believe will
promote peace and security for women and that we hope
will make important contributions towards prevention.

Facing a problem of this magnitude requires efforts
on the part of all. Therefore, we appeal to all Member
States to fully meet their commitments to international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We recognize the invaluable work of civil society,
youth organizations and defenders of women's rights,
and we appeal for their ongoing support and leadership
in this crucial struggle for the future of humankind.

