Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you for organizing
today's meeting, Mr. President, as well as the Secretary-
General and the Executive Director of UN-Women, for
their participation in our discussion. Our thanks also go
to to Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah for her participation.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/900)
presents a fairly complete and objective picture of the
state of affairs in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), as well as subsequent resolutions aimed
at protecting women in armed conflict, enhancing
their role in peace processes and unlocking their
potential. If I may, I would like to note that as part
of its consideration of the agenda item on women and
peace and security, the Security Council should focus
specifically on issues directly related to establishing
and maintaining international peace and security. In
our view, attempts to exploit these issues - in order
to advance the cause in the Council of human rights
and gender issues traditionally covered by other bodies
of our Organization such as the General Assembly, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights Council
and the Commission on the Status of Women - are

damaging and unfounded. Such tactics lead to pointless
duplication of effort and an imbalance in our system's
overall coordination, and ultimately create obstacles to
the effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

The Russian Federation consistently supports all
measures aimed at increasing the influence of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well
as women's active participation in peace negotiations
and electoral processes. The key document in the
context of post-conflict restoration is the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, which, together with the Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and
security, establishes the essential legal and political
basis for effective cooperation. At the same time, the
classic negotiating process, founded on the goals and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, with its
effectiveness confirmed and in demand among Member
States, has in no way lost its relevance. Our task is to
create the conditions for the full inclusion of women in
every possible aspect of that process.

Considering the importance of this topic, we would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his proposals
for organizing the work of the departments of the
Secretariat in preparation for the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). While a
comprehensive review of actions for implementing
the women and peace and security agenda in the
upcoming period will be extremely helpful, it will be
important to focus on evaluating the effectiveness of
the performance of the relevant areas of the Secretariat
while sticking strictly to the principle of the division of
labour. In that regard, we expect to see information on
the evaluation of the effectiveness of the Secretariat's
gender parity programme, and an expansion of the
number of specialist advisers in peacekeeping missions
and other United Nations country offices. We hope that
in the framework of the forthcoming review, proposals
and assessments from Member States, including those
dealing with armed conflicts, will be considered from
the point of view of the practical implementation of
Security Council resolutions in the area.

We would like to say a few words about the
practice of developing regional and national strategies
and establishing national structures for implementing
this issue. We firmly believe that such measures
should be adopted out of objective necessity owing
to the existence of an armed conflict or post-conflict
settlement. Unfortunately, we cannot support a policy
of mathematically enlarging this or that bureaucratic
structure in the absence of conflict, threats of
infringements on the rights of women or crimes
committed against them. In my opinion, today's
discussion clearly demonstrates the substantial progress
that has been made in creating equal opportunities for
women's active participation in the maintenance of
peace and security, as well as enhancing their role in
decision-making. We are ready to continue constructive
dialogue on the subject.

