Mr. Patricio (Mozambique): It gives me great
pleasure to join previous speakers in congratulating
Namibia on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and for the brilliant manner in which
you, Mr. Minister, and your able Permanent
Representative are conducting the work of the Security
Council during the month of October.

I wish to commend your initiative to convene this
open debate on "Women and peace and security" on
this very important day - United Nations Day. This
debate is certainly an excellent occasion for us to once
again join efforts and exchange views on the search for
appropriate and concerted actions. It is also an
opportunity to delineate adequate follow-up procedures
to implement the decisions taken and the
recommendations made during the Millennium Summit
and the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly, entitled "Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century",
with a View to ensuring the more active participation of
women in the promotion of peace and security
worldwide.

Peace and security will continue to be the major
concern of humanity in the new millennium, as
conflicts continue to grow and devastate many parts of
the world. Women and girls are vulnerable both in time
of peace and in time of war, due to the profound gender
inequalities that still characterize our societies. It is
estimated that 80 per cent of internally displaced
persons and refugees are women and children. Women
and girls are also victims of rape, domestic violence,
sexual exploitation, trafficking, sexual humiliation and
mutilation.

The reversal of this situation requires from all of
us great political will and determination to fulfil our
commitments with regard to all decisions and
recommendations relating to the protection and
promotion of the rights of women.

As stated by our heads of State and Government,
assembled here at the Millennium Summit,

"No individual and no nation must be denied the

opportunity to benefit from development. The
equal rights and opportunities of women and men
must be assured". (A/RES/55/2, para. 6)

Against this background, women must play a role
of relevance in conflict prevention, the resolution of
disputes, peacekeeping, post-conflict peace-building
and the reconstruction process, and development.

In this regard, my delegation appreciates the
dedication shown by United Nations bodies such as the
Department for Disarmament Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which, in
close collaboration with the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, are joining efforts to ensure the participation
of women in the promotion of peace and security, as
stated this morning by Ms. King and Ms. Heyzer. We
also commend the leadership role that the Secretary-
General has provided throughout the United Nations
system on the advancement of women, which he
reconfirmed in his statement today.

We very much appreciate the decision by the
Government of Namibia to host the seminar on
"Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective in
Multidimensional Peace Support Operations",
organized by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. The seminar adopted the Windhoek
Declaration and the Namibia Plan of Action,
documents that identify actions to be taken to ensure
that a gender perspective is adopted in all
multidimensional operations in support of peace.

In order to protect and promote the rights of
women, including their involvement in maintaining
peace and security, the Government of Mozambique
adopts political, social, and economic policies which
envisage gender perspectives in all spheres of activity.
This is done in conformity with our Constitution and
the many international legal instruments and
declarations that have been incorporated into our
internal laws, including the 1995 Beijing and
Copenhagen Declarations.

The Government has committed itself to
increasing the effectiveness of all regional and
international legal instruments to which it is a party,
through reviewing national legislation. Accordingly, in
close cooperation with civil society, the Government
has embarked on the process of reviewing national
legislation aimed at incorporating into our internal laws
the main provisions contained in the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and other related international and regional
instruments. The Government has also been taking
action to increase awareness of women's rights in
Mozambican society. As part of this process, a national
debate is taking place on the review of the law of the
family, in which women from different social groups
and religious backgrounds are actively participating in
order to express and defend their rights on such matters
as marriage and related issues.

To enhance the institutional mechanisms for the
advancement of women, the Government has
established a Ministry of Women and Coordination of
Social Affairs, which coordinates the activities of an
operative group, including Government officials and
representatives from civil society and academia, whose
objective it is to supervise and enhance the
implementation of policies and programmes for the
advancement of women.

The participation of women in leadership and
decision-making has also been encouraged by the
Government. For instance, representation of women in
Parliament increased from 65 to 80 between 1995 and
2000, out of a total of 250 Members of Parliament. At
the executive level, the number of women increased
from one minister and four vice-ministers to three
ministers and five vice-ministers.

The Ministry of Education, in collaboration with
the United Nations Children's Fund, is promoting
access to education for the girl child so that women
will be able to take their rightful position in society.

In the context of the implementation of the
Government's Action Plan for the Reduction of
Absolute Poverty, for the period 2000-2004, the role of
women is being underlined as a matter of priority, with
special attention being paid to women in rural areas
and to women as heads of family.

Women are also accorded priority among
vulnerable groups with regard to HIV infection and the
impact that the HIV/AIDS epidemic is having in the
country. For that reason, they deserve special attention
in the context of the national response to the epidemic,
a response that is being led by the Government, with
the participation of various social groups, through the
implementation of the National Strategic Plan to
Combat HIV/AIDS. The implementation of these
policies and programmes is enabling the protection of
the rights of women and their participation at all levels
in the national reconstruction process and in social
development. In order to defend and promote their
rights, Mozambican women are organizing various
specialized associations, and they are also members of
international women's organizations. Earlier this month
they organized various rallies and marches throughout
the country as part of the 2000 World Women's March.
In the capital city, Maputo, thousands of women and
men participated in a march that culminated in a big
rally where they conveyed to His Excellency Joaquim
Chissano, President of the Republic of Mozambique,
their demand for the protection of women's rights and
protested against domestic Violence.

Durable peace and security will be obtained only
if all peace-loving nations dedicate themselves to
tackling the root causes of conflict in the world. One of
them - for developing countries, the most urgent - is
the eradication of poverty. This noble task requires the
commitment of all international and national actors,
including women.

In Mozambique and many other African
countries, women have played, and still play, an
important role in looking for urgent ways to bring
about durable solutions to the conflicts still prevailing.
They are always at the forefront of peace and economic
development in Africa and all over the world. Women
and girls need to have greater access to education,
employment and social and political participation in
this noble endeavour to maintain peace and security.

In the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), we also develop and implement programmes
that enhance women's participation in the process of
economic cooperation and integration, following the
guidelines of the Beijing and Copenhagen Declarations
as well as of the recent Millennium Declaration. It is
now time for all of us to translate commitments already
made into concrete action.

In conclusion, we commend the Security Council
for its initiative and urge it to continue its endeavour to
ensure that all concerned refrain from human rights
abuses in conflict situations - particularly abuses of
women and children, as highlighted in Ms. Graca
Machel's report - respect international law and
promote non-violent forms of conflict resolution and a
culture of peace.

