Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important and
historic debate on women and peace and security. On
behalf of my delegation, I commend you on your able
leadership of the Council this month. We welcome not
only the Secretary-General's extensive report
(S/2010/498) before us, but also the Secretary-
General's first cross-cutting report on women and
peace and security (S/2010/173).

On the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), it is important to take a step back to gain a
more global perspective and to celebrate how far we
have come, as well as to recognize areas for
improvement in terms of the participation and
protection of women in situations of conflict. These
have been 10 years of overwhelmingly strong
consensus around the resolution. During this time, my
country has emerged from decades of suffering to
achieve major progress for women. We now work in
solidarity with the international community to
eliminate the deeply rooted tragedy of the
disproportionate effects of conflict on women and to
highlight the crucial role of women's leadership in the
peace process.

The Afghan people have suffered immensely for
more than 30 years under foreign invasions, civil wars
and Taliban rule. In the 1990s, Afghan women were the
targets of brutality and widespread violence, including
gender-based violence and oppression. The Taliban
completely removed women from all aspects of public
life, depriving them of such fundamental rights as
education and participation in both the economic and
political sectors. The enemies of women's rights
remain strong in their efforts. They misrepresent
Afghan traditions, using their own interpretations of
Islam to justify their actions.
Since 2001 Afghanistan has made considerable
progress in the advancement of women. The
Government of Afghanistan has committed its energy
and resources to strengthening the rights of women and
improving their role in all aspects of political, social,
cultural and economic life, as shown through our
National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan.
The voices of Afghan women have been increasingly
amplified by our growing, vibrant civil society and the
active presence of women in the media.

Key areas of success for the improvement of the
lives of women have been in the spheres of political
participation, education and health. As we finalize the
results of our second parliamentary election, we recall
that, last month, millions of Afghans went to the polls
to make their voice heard. In those recent elections,
406 out of 2,556 candidates were women. That
compares with 328 women candidates in 2005, and
ensures that women will fill at least all the 68 seats, or
25 per cent, allocated for women and will likely win
additional seats. Women will fill at least a quarter of
the Afghan parliament, nearing our Millennium
Development Goal of 30 per cent, and will make up
18 per cent of Government employees.

There are now over 1,000 women in the Afghan
National Security Forces. We plan to increase the
number of women in the Afghan National Police to
over 5,000 in the next five years. The presence of
women in those crucial positions has had a significant
impact. We are proud of their resilience and bravery in
protecting our population.

Remarkable progress has been made in terms of
the number of women and girls at all levels of
education and the increased literacy ratio of girls to
boys. Around 37 per cent of the 7 million students in
Afghanistan are female. Today, Afghan boys and girls
have equal access to education. We must continue our
efforts to teach girls to read and to provide more
accessible schooling for women and girls, particularly
in rural areas.

Furthermore, by providing basic health services
to nearly 90 per cent of our population, in Afghanistan,
health care has improved tremendously for both men
and women. That sector also provides employment
opportunities for women, as over 20 per cent of doctors
and half of the health-care workers in Afghanistan are
women.
The commitment of the Government of
Afghanistan and the support of the international
community have been crucial factors in our
achievements regarding women in the past decade.
During the London and Kabul Conferences, in January
and July of this year, we reaffirmed our commitment to
protecting the rights of women. As the country moves
towards seeking a new political framework for peace
and reconciliation, it is vital to make sure that those
achievements are sustained and that the rights of
women are protected in the future.

While we consider the peace talks to be an
important part of our shared stabilization efforts, the
human rights and women's rights enshrined in our
Constitution are non-negotiable. Today, I can affirm
that women's rights will remain a priority in all peace
talks and at every single step of the reconciliation
process. We see our reconciliation process as the way
to end violence for all Afghan people, including
women. The representation of women in the Afghan
Peace Jirga in June 2010 and the inclusion of 10
women representatives in the newly established High
Peace Council are important steps in efforts to
guarantee the active involvement of women in the
peace process and facilitate reconciliation talks with
those who are willing to renounce violence.

At the 10-year mark, as we reflect on the
successes and challenges of resolution 1325 (2000), we
welcome the Secretary-General's report of 28
September 2010 (S/2010/498), which suggests clear,
revised indicators for measuring the success of that
resolution. We now have an extremely useful set of
tools, which must be implemented in order to gauge
our impact in that area going forward. We must revisit
the original goals and objectives of resolution 1325
(2000) in order to strengthen the monitoring process,
address potential gaps and learn from one another's
best practices.

We are appreciative of the crucial role of the
international community and thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for its support of all
national efforts towards improving the situation of
women in Afghanistan. We extend our gratitude to the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) for engaging women's groups to support
the efforts of authorities to improve the investigation of
sexual violence, thus strengthening the capacity of
communities to prevent such horrendous acts. We are
committed to further working with UNIFEM. in
completing our report to the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women in the
near future.

We also appreciate the roles of all United Nations
bodies, such as UNICEF, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations
Population Fund, for their efforts towards improving
the lives of women in Afghanistan. We have high
expectations for the work of UN Women and support
the development of a strong relationship with that
institution going forward.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is not just about rescuing
women, nor jus about helping women who are
struggling to overcome conflict, but about recognizing
the unique role of women as peacemakers and creating
opportunities for women to excel in leadership roles.
What better place in the world than Afghanistan to
demonstrate the importance of that issue. Afghan
women are not damsels in distress. They have been
victimized, but they are not helpless victims. They
have their own ideas about the needs of women in their
country and must be listened to and supported on their
paths to self-empowerment.

Honouring resolution 1325 (2000) and the
subsequent resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1889 (2009) is not only a commitment on the part of
the Afghan Government, but a necessity. While women
are generally the first to be affected by conflict, let us
all look forward to witnessing women as the first
beneficiaries of peace.

