Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing
today as well as for his tireless efforts to promote the
women, peace and security agenda. My delegation
also thanks the Executive Director of UN Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, and
Ms. Brigitte Bapilou for their informative and inspiring
presentations today.

While there has been significant progress in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) over the years,
persistent gaps and challenges remain. For far too
many women in conflict-affected societies, the mere
protection of a woman's basic rights, let alone gender
equality, remains a daunting challenge. In Syria,
women account for the majority of the casualties and
the displaced population. In the eastern Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, women continue to be victimized
in the conflict. Given this shared concern, I would like
to highlight the following four points.

First, the Council must continue to integrate women,
peace and security issues into its work in a substantive
way. As the Secretary-General's report (S/2013/525)
elaborates, the Council increasingly incorporates
gender perspectives into its resolutions, in particular
through the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
missions. That is a welcome development. However, it
must be done in a more systematic way if it is to be
truly effective.

We also support the Secretary-General's call on the
Council to include women, peace and security aspects
in all thematic debates. If the Council's efforts in those
areas are to be successful, they must be supported by
the timely delivery of information. We would welcome
more regular updates and briefings on the status of
women and girls in armed conflict from all United
Nations field missions. We also look forward to a high-
level global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in preparation for the high-level review in
2015.

Secondly, greater attention should be paid to
promoting women's representation in post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding processes. Women's
experiences in conflict are fundamentally different
from those of men. As such, women's needs and
priorities should be reflected in peace and justice
deliberations. Transitional justice mechanisms need to
be more gender-sensitive. Women's efforts to recover
from their experiences in conflict have often been
hampered by a lack of fundamental rights, such as the
right to citizenship. Such structural inequality should
be addressed by transitional justice.

Thirdly, all cases of sexual violence in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations must be adequately
addressed. The suffering of women and girls, who
often fall victim to sexual violence in times of war,
has frequently gone unreported or unacknowledged.
Transitional justice is therefore important in bringing
perpetrators to account and ending impunity. We
also recognize the important role of the International
Criminal Court in ensuring accountability and justice
for such crimes.

Fourthly, we would like to underline the crucial
role played by women's civil society organizations in
conflict-resolution and peacebuilding. In that regard,
the Republic of Korea attaches great importance to
the interactions between the Security Council and
women's organizations. It is encouraging that the
Council's recent field visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Great Lakes included interactive
meetings with local women's organizations.

Finally, we welcome the unanimous adoption today
of resolution 2122 (2013). We believe that this seventh
resolution on women, peace and security will be another
milestone on the road towards gender equality.

