Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to take
the floor.

(spoke in English)

Canada wishes to thank the United Kingdom for
holding this open debate on the prevention of conflict-
related sexual Violence, an issue of great importance
to our country, as it includes the despicable acts
of rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced
pregnancy, forced sterilization and any other form
of sexual violence of comparable gravity. Those acts
are deplorable, prohibited by international law, and
constitute an impediment to conflict resolution,
development and transition to peace and democracy.

Canada, which is a proud member and Chair of the
Group of Friends against Sexual Violence in Conflict,
recognizes that women's social, political and economic
empowerment, their equality with men and the active
participation of men and boys in combating all forms
of violence against women are central to long-term
prevention efforts. Preventing sexual violence requires
promoting and protecting the human rights of women
and girls. Prevention also requires supporting survivors
on their path to recovery from such crimes, assisting
their access to justice and holding perpetrators to
account.

(spoke in French)

The Security Council and the United Nations
system should act systematically and comprehensively
to address gaps and challenges in its work on
women, peace and security, as well as to monitor the
commitments by parties to conflict to prevent and
address conflict-related sexual violence.

The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/l49) details the global scope of conflict-related
sexual violence, including many instances of early and
forced marriage of women and girls. Canada is gravely
concerned about reports of forced marriage, rape and
sexual slavery and condemns the early and forced
marriage of women and girls in all situations, including
the practice of forcing rape survivors to marry their
perpetrators or other family members. We welcome the
efforts of the Secretary-General to focus attention on
the practice of early and forced marriage in the context
of armed conflict.

(spoke in English)

The primary responsibility for the prevention
of sexual violence in conflict lies with national
Governments as well as with the leadership of non-State
armed groups. Where those leaders fail to respond to
sexual violence or are party to the crimes, they must be
held to account. Often, however, Governments lack the
capacity to respond adequately.

Conflict significantly weakens national justice
systems, resulting in a limited number of perpetrators
facing justice. In such cases, Member States
could request the assistance of trained experts for
investigations and prosecutions and to strengthen the
capacity of local law enforcement.

Canada welcomes the engagement of the Security
Council on the issue of preventing sexual violence. We
urge the Council to ensure the inclusion of prevention
and response to sexual violence in its mandates and
resolutions and to ensure that those elements are
implemented. The Council should take concrete
measures to support women's opportunities for equal
participation and decision-making in all conflict-
prevention and -resolution processes. It must ensure the
health, safety, human rights and dignity of survivors
and should hold perpetrators to full account.

In that regard, Canada calls on the Council to ensure
that Sanctions Committees add criteria pertaining to
acts of rape and other forms of sexual violence to their
existing criteria. Further action at the international
level is imperative to end sexual violence in conflict,
to tackle the lack of accountability that exists for those
crimes and to provide comprehensive support services
to survivors. For its part, Canada is active in the
prevention and response to sexual violence in conflict.
For example, Canada is contributing $18.5 million to
the United Nations Development Programme to support
the fight against sexual violence in the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, at
the London launch of the Group of Eight declaration
on preventing sexual violence in conflict, Canada
announced an additional $5 million contribution to
international efforts to be programmed this year.

Canada urges all Member States to join the
international effort and we look forward to working
together to stop sexual violence.

