The Secretary-General: I thank Nigeria for
convening this important debate.

Conflict-related sexual violence is an issue of
pressing importance. This grave human rights abuse
is as destructive as any bomb or bullet. It inflicts
unimaginable suffering on women and men, girls and
boys. It destroys families and communities and tears
the social fabric of nations. By targeting society's most
vulnerable members, it contributes to enduring poverty
and insecurity. It impedes reconciliation, peace and
reconstruction.

That is why the Council has clearly and consistently
stated that conflict-related sexual Violence is a matter of
international peace and security. Successive resolutions
have created a strong global framework for prevention.
Grievous violations still occur too often, but we are
beginning to make tangible progress, as the report
before the Council (S/20l4/l8l) shows.

My Special Representative has examined the
progress made by several countries, including the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia. Just a
few years ago, rape in these conflicts seemed intractable
and inevitable. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Somalia are now demonstrating that progress is
possible. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
developing new legal structures to end impunity for
perpetrators. Somalia has shown commitment at the
highest level to ending sexual violence, including by
signing a joint communique with the United Nations.
Efforts are now under way to develop an action plan.

The United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict is working
with Colombia, C6te d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Guinea, Somalia and South Sudan to
strengthen their justice systems. Every day, more
countries are building the technical capacity to prevent
and redress sexual violence. The multidisciplinary and
multisectoral approach of the Office of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict is
driving this progress. The Special Representative
engages in high-level advocacy to generate national
ownership, leadership and responsibility.

Once political commitment has been secured,
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict works with countries to build
their capacity to fight impunity for crimes of sexual
violence. The Team is drawn from the United
Nations Development Programme, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and led by the Office
of my Special Representative. It helps Governments to
address reforms to the military and criminal justice
systems and other crucial areas. With sound legislation,
comprehensive prevention and response mechanisms,
and enhanced capacity, military and civilian justice
systems will be better able to address conflict-related
sexual Violence promptly and effectively.

Another key element in political and peacekeeping
missions has been the deployment of women
protection advisers. Their expertise on human rights,
gender analysis and peace and security is helping to
mainstream the prevention of conflict-related sexual
violence into peacekeeping and special political
missions. In line with the principle of "Delivering as
one", United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict is an inter-agency network of 13 United
Nations entities, chaired by my Special Representative.
This coordination mechanism ensures that our response
avoids duplication, leading to a measured, sustainable
and coherent strategy that makes the best use of limited
resources and the strengths of each agency. The goal is
to provide services and support for victims and ensure
that human rights are at the forefront of all interventions.

This coordinated response, under the leadership
of my Special Representative, embodies the spirit of
the "Rights up front" initiative. It affirms my vision
of a United Nations that works as one to prevent grave
human rights violations. It is imperative that United
Nations actors and political leaders work together to
stop rights abuses before they happen. The renewed
commitment of the United Nations to better meeting
the human rights responsibilities set by Member States
through the "Rights up front" initiative is central in
this regard. My latest report illustrates what we can
achieve through greater cooperation. Prevention is our
collective responsibility. Only through coordination
and partnership can we succeed in protecting the
most vulnerable. I count on the Council's continued
leadership and support as we work together to eliminate
sexual violence in conflict.

