Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I want to pay tribute
to Ambassador Matjila. October was a very intensive
month, with a week in Africa. I think I spent more time
with Mr. Matjila than I spent with my wife last month.

I wish good luck to the United Kingdom, which is
starting its presidency on a gorgeous day. I would have
loved to see the curtains open and have some of those
rays of sunshine come into the Chamber. Also, the
United Kingdom separated us from our French brothers
and sisters here for a month, the only consolation is that
I now have the privilege of sitting next to the Permanent
Observer of the African Union here.

Let me first thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for her briefing. I think it was a fantastic idea to go
to the Horn of Africa. The messages that the Deputy
Secretary-General has brought us are all ones that
we share with regard to women's empowerment and
participation. She also mentioned sexual violence,
which unfortunately continues to occur, and here I
would like to pay tribute to Ms. Pramila Patten, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The reason that she is here
is due to the fact that this is still a concern.

I was also very encouraged by what the Deputy
Secretary-General said about regional cooperation,
particularly on how it is developing and how important
it is. But I think the most important message here is
that these joint missions and the cooperation that they
represent between the African Union and the United
Nations have now become a real and intense tradition.
That was symbolized by the fact that when we in the
Security Council went to Ethiopia to meet with the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the Deputy
Secretary-General was there at the same time, in a
demonstration of the intensity of the contact between
the African Union and the United Nations.

With regard to Ms. Fatima Mohammed's briefing, I
fully concur with her key point, which is that peace and
security do not stand a chance if women are excluded.
I have to say that when we consider South Sudan, the
one country that the Deputy Secretary-General did not
visit, I believe that if there were greater participation
by women in the top levels of leadership, the situation
there would be different. I am pleased about the opening
of an Ethiopian chapter of the African Women Leaders
Network, and in that connection, I would like to pay
tribute to the President of Ethiopia, who spearheaded its
launch. With regard to the President of Ethiopia, I want
to echo my Belgian colleague, who pointed out that not
only is she the only woman President of an African
country, there are no female executive presidents
or prime ministers in Africa, either. We earnestly
believe that this must change. Some countries have
constitutions that do not allow women to be president
or prime minister, which I think is a serious deficiency.

With regard to the various places that the Deputy
Secretary-General visited, we would of course like to
pay tribute to Ethiopia, where the Security Council's
meeting with the Prime Minister was so refreshing, but
where we all realize how many problems he is facing
domestically in terms of getting his reform agenda and
message of national reconciliation adopted. This is
therefore no time to be complacent.

With regard to the Sudan, Ambassador Singer
Weisinger already mentioned the meeting last week at
which we were briefed by Ms. Alaa Salah, a wonderful
and very courageous woman (see S/PV.8649). The
young women of Khartoum stood up and played a huge
role in the peaceful protests. They were the backbone
of the peaceful revolution in Sudan, but they are not
adequately represented in the transitional Government
or in the currentpeace talks. I can only echo Ambassador
Singer-Weisinger's question, which was about what
can be done to ensure that more women participate.
Measures should also be taken to end female genital
mutilation in the Sudan, another serious problem.

Turning to Eritrea, we have indeed witnessed some
changes there. However, if we look closer, we see that
its land borders are still not really open. Many Citizens
are still subject to the dreaded conscription into national
service, including women in the paramilitary training
conducted at the Sawa camp.

In Djibouti, we commend the efforts being made
to promote the role of women in the country's political
and economic life, but once again we believe that more
must be done to tackle discrimination and violence
against women, especially with regard to implementing
laws and fighting impunity.

In Somalia, too, we believe it is important for women
to play a major role in the country's reconciliation,
including the management and prevention of conflict.
It will be important to ensure the strong participation
of women in the 2020-2021 electoral process, as both
candidates and voters. That will be a yardstick for what
is happening in the country and the extent to which the
women and peace and security agenda is actually being
implemented. We will support that, and we truly hope
that as the Deputy Secretary-General said, the winds
of change are indeed blowing through the country. We
once again thank her for leading this trip, which was
extremely valuable both as a message and a measure.

