Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank you, Madam, for
convening this important meeting on women, peace
and security. We endorse the statement made by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the States
members of the Human Security Network.

My delegation thanks Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his comprehensive report (S/2011/598*)
and strategic framework for the period 2011-2020. The
report reveals that while progress has been made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the situation
of women in conflict and post-conflict situations has
nevertheless not improved significantly. We therefore
welcome the strategic framework proposed by the
Secretary-General for the period 2011-2020. Likewise,
my delegation welcomes the briefing by Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Under-Secretary-General for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women.
There can be no doubt that the establishment of
UN-Women constitutes a milestone in the defence of
the rights and the protection of women. In June, Under-
Secretary-General Bachelet submitted to Member
States a first strategic plan, which my country fully
supports.

Eleven years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the Council has continued to make progress in
providing guidelines on strengthening the protection of
women in situations of armed conflict. To that end, in
2008, the Council adopted resolution 1820 (2008),
which noted that attacks on women in armed conflicts
continued to occur. On 16 December 2010, the Council
adopted resolution 1960 (2010). One important aspect
that has been highlighted is the need for increased
participation by women in political processes,
particularly in mediation and in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. In that respect, the meeting
organized by UN-Women in the context of the sixty-
sixth session of the General Assembly on women and
political participation takes on particular importance.
My delegation feels that the meeting should be
replicated at the regional, national and local levels.

With regard to the peacebuilding process, Chile
notes the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the vision of gender equality that the Commission has
brought to its work, in keeping with the resolutions that
led to its creation. It is also noteworthy that the
Peacebuilding Fund has allocated significant resources
to incorporating the gender perspective in the projects
it funds.

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
not the exclusive province of the Security Council or of
the United Nations system; it is also incumbent upon
the international community as a whole. In that respect,
the formulation and development of a national action
plan is crucial. Chile has had such a plan in place
since 2009. By involving a broad swath of civil society
in its development, and by incorporating the Secretary-
General's earlier recommendations, we designed an
integrated action plan that brings together, as
effectively as possible, agencies charged with the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, all
with the comprehensive inclusion of a gender
perspective. The main action lines of that document are
to apply a gender focus to the respect and promotion of
human rights; to promote the equal participation of
women both in peacekeeping operations and in related
decision-making bodies; to bring a gender perspective
in the broadest sense of the term to bear on the design,
implementation and execution of our international
cooperation policies; to strengthen the technical
capacity of both public officials and civil society with
regard to gender issues and security and conflict; and
to promote the regional implementation of resolution

1325 (2000) through the exchange of experience and
international cooperation, both bilaterally and via the
regional peacekeeping operations in which Chile takes
part, particularly in the context of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

In conclusion, we support today's presidential
statement of the Council (S/PRST/2011/20), which
reiterates this principal organ's commitment to the
complete and effective implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009)
and 1960 (2010) on women, peace and security, as well
as previous relevant presidential statements.

