Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Chilean delegation for holding this important
debate today. And I thank Assistant Secretary-General
Kang, International Committee of the Red Cross
Director Durham and Ms. Elman for their sobering and
challenging briefings this morning. This is the first
protection-of-civilians debate in which a representative
from a non-governmental organization has briefed the
Council, and I welcome that initiative. It is vital that
we listen to people on the ground, and I hope that this
example will be repeated in future.
The protection of civilians is at the heart of
everything we strive to achieve in the Security Council.
It is our raison d'etre and what the United Nations
system is ultimately judged on. Protecting the lives of
women, men, boys and girls from the ravages of conflict
is vital to our mission. Today, we consider the unique
and devastating impact that conflict has on women
and girls and the challenges that we must overcome to
empower them as equals in our society. Daily we are
reminded of the vast array of human rights violations
that women suffer in conflict, and of extremist groups,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Boko Haram, which attack women's rights - their
bodies, their education, their choice of religion - as a
central tactic of their terror campaigns.

It is estimated that 1,500 Yazidi and Christian
people were forced into sexual slavery in Iraq last
year. In Nigeria, hundreds of women and girls were
kidnapped from Chibok. In South Sudan and the
Central African Republic, high levels of child forced
marriage and rape persist unabated. It is clear that much
more can be done, and it is vital that we do it. We must
address the underlying causes of gender inequality and
violence against women, not only in conflicts but also
in peacetime.

I think there are four key areas for the Security
Council to consider.

First, we must consider women's participation and
equality. Queen Boudicea is a symbol of powerful
female leadership in Britain. A tribal warrior, over the
past 2,000 years she has inspired many great women
who have fought for gender equality. But even in my
country there is still a way to go, and we cannot be
complacent. The United Kingdom is thirty-fifth on
the United Nations Development Programme Gender
Inequality Index. We continually strive to achieve
equality and to end violence against women in our
society. Our gender pay gap is the lowest on record. We
have allocated almost $60 million to specialist support
services and national helplines for domestic violence.
By 2016, women in our military will be serving in
combat positions alongside men for the first time.

Unsurprisingly, countries in conflict face particular
challenges on this agenda, with underlying inequality
being compounded by a breakdown in society. To
quote a few examples, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo comes one hundred and forty-seventh in the
Inequality Index. Mali is one hundred and forty-eighth,
Afghanistan one hundred and forty-ninth. One woman
is raped every minute in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In Afghanistan, women face the daily threat
of assassination purely for choosing a role in public
life. These are challenges that we have to address. The
fact that women are not present at every peace table is
as much a rebuke to men as an insult to women. That
so many post-conflict Governments do not include
women in their security and judicial infrastructure is
as damaging to those bodies' success as it is to women's
rights. That we struggle to have an appropriate number
of women on a high-level panel considering the future
of peace operations shows that, even here at the United
Nations Headquarters, our own words do not yet match
reality. This must change if we are truly committed to
enhancing women's protection and to bringing about a
more peaceful society.

Secondly, supporting survivors of gender-based
violence should be incorporated into humanitarian
programming and into the first stage of an emergency
response. Provisions should be put in place for
vulnerable populations, such as the young, the disabled,
the elderly and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex communities. Through the call to action
in 2013, the United Kingdom announced $30 million
in new funding to help protect women and girls in
emergencies. That includes $5 million for the United
Nations Population Fund to establish safe spaces for
women in Syria, and $6 million and $2.5 million in
Lebanon and Jordan, respectively, to prevent vulnerable
families from turning to child labour and survival sex.

Thirdly, the protection of civilians by peacekeepers
must address the needs of women and girls as well as
men and boys. The report of the Global Summit to End

Sexual Violence in Conflict, held in London in June
2014, will be circulated shortly, with recommendations
including those on peacekeeping. Addressing
sexual violence in conflict should be a mission-wide
objective. Indicators of success for protection-of-
civilian mandates should include the consultation of
women, particularly displaced populations, and how
the concerns identified are being addressed. Scenario-
basedtraining on sexual violence should be incorporated
into every predeployment training for contributing
countries, including at the senior-officer level. And
existing reporting and accountability mechanisms
for sexual exploitation and abuse committed by
peacekeeping personnel must be much tighter. We
look forward to examining recommendations from the
high-level discussions on Monday on this topic. It is
critical that the peace operations review reflects these
issues and the broader obligations of Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and Department of Political
Affairs on women and peace and security and women's
participation.
Finally, engaging with military and security actors
remains a key challenge. The security sector should
be responsive to women's needs, and gender-sensitive
training should be part of any police, army and justice
sector reform. Concrete measures must be taken to
increase the recruitment, retention and promotion
of women throughout national militaries and police
forces. Greater information-sharing among military
and civilians is crucial to better inform our strategies
to protect women.

The year 2015 is a significant one for women
in conflict environments. As we move towards the
fifteenth anniversary ofresolution 1325 (2000), we look
forward to the publication, in October, of the global
study and the high-level review on women and peace
and security. We hope for ambitious, tangible outcomes
and commitments that can really change the lives of
women and girls across the globe. Words are no longer
enough. Now our actions must speak louder.

