Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): It has
been two years since a momentous development for
women was marked with the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). Today, as much of the
attention here at the United Nations evolves around a
potential conflict with far-reaching implications for the
world, it is all the more appropriate that we should,
even at this late date, take this day to explore how
peace may be strengthened, specifically by reaffirming
our resolve to turn the goals of the historic resolution
into reality, thus incorporating women into all matters
and efforts relating to peace and security.

The Secretary-General's report is comprehensive
in its analysis and suggestions for action. Many of the
suggested actions contained in the report open up new
vistas for integrating gender perspectives and
increasing the participation of women in peace
processes, peacekeeping, humanitarian operations,
reconstruction and rehabilitation, and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. The concreteness of
the suggestions is most welcome.

In particular, I believe that the collection of data
related to peace operations disaggregated by gender
and age, as suggested in the report, should be a priority
action if other actions are to find relevance to the
reality on the ground.

Furthermore, the increased profile for women and
girls both as beneficiaries and participants in the initial
stages of humanitarian operations, as suggested in
recommended Action 14, would prevent women and
girls from falling victim to later abuses and violence
that prey upon their particular vulnerabilities in crisis
situations.

Indeed, prevention is a key aspect of any lasting
problem-solving effort. In this regard, I would like to
point out the relative lack of attention given to the role
women can play in preventing disruption of peace and
conflict.

In peacetime diplomacy, women already have a
significant presence, as our able female colleagues here
attest to. However, in conflict prevention or crisis-
management processes, the contributions of women are
rarely discussed.

If women have significant contributions to make
in building and strengthening a new peace, they would
also be effective facilitators and negotiators for
preserving a peace that exists. In this regard, reiterating
a point in the historic resolution, I urge that the
Secretary-General appoint more women as special
representatives and envoys on his behalf, and that
qualified women offer their names for inclusion in the
centralized roster.

Women's role in conflict prevention may also be
expanded at the local level. Training programs for
women and women's groups on peace processes should
include conflict prevention as well. By now, there is
enough evidence to show that the communication style
of women tends to be more flexible and consensus-
oriented than that of men. Without carrying the
generalization too far, I believe that the greater the
input of women, the greater the likelihood for conflict
to be averted as well as resolved.

In closing, I would like to reiterate the strong
commitment of my Government to the historic
resolution, and look forward to seeing the Secretary-
General's recommendations turn into action.

