Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes to associate itself with the statement
made by the Minister of International Cooperation of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.

At the outset, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate you on your initiative to convene this
open debate. Argentina's participation in peacekeeping
and humanitarian assistance missions is among the
pillars of its foreign policy. For that reason, as we
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Argentine Republic wishes
to underscore its firm commitment to the role of
women in peace and security.

Argentina played a dynamic role in the
negotiation and adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council in
1999 and 2000. The resolution brings together two
objectives that are part of our national policy with
regard to gender and defence: the promotion and
protection of the human rights of women, and the
inclusion of women in peacekeeping operations.

Resolution 1325 (2000), then, reaffirms the
important role that women play in the prevention and
solution of conflicts and in peacebuilding,
underscoring the importance of women's participating
on equal footing with men and of their full
participation in all initiatives aimed at maintaining and
fostering peace and security.

In that connection we wish to highlight the
policies carried out by our Government in the defence
sector. In recent years the Ministry of Defence -
under the leadership of a woman, Dr. Nilda Garre -
has undertaken a profound process of mainstreaming a
gender perspective. That began by granting a voice to
female members of our armed forces, which allowed us
to diagnose their situation and led to reform that
included the repeal of discriminatory resolutions in that
sector. That process culminated with the National Plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
defence sector.

In 2007 Argentina was selected by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to
undertake a pilot programme in the region to
disseminate the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In that framework, the Argentine Foreign
Ministry convened an inter-ministerial group on gender
and peacekeeping. In 2008 the Foreign Ministry
organized, with the support of DPKO and UNIFEM,
the first regional workshop for developing a gender
policy in peacekeeping operations and humanitarian
assistance. That workshop was a valuable contribution
that prompted a debate among the countries of our
region and the mainstreaming of a gender perspective
in public policies in all sectors.

To continue making progress towards the
objectives set out in resolution 1325 (2000), we wish to
take this opportunity to reaffirm some of the
commitments taken on by Argentina.

First is the implementation of quantitative and
qualitative tools to measure and to know in numerical
terms - but also strategically - what the situation is
with regard to participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. On that point it is worth emphasizing that
we are planning to publish in March 2011 the results of
the surveys undertaken with the contingent deployed in
Haiti. It gathers their experience in gender matters
prior to deployment and looks at their experience with
the effective implementation of a gender perspective
during the mission.

Another point is continuing to develop a data
base that gathers statistics on the voluntary
participation of women in peacekeeping operations,
including the number of women deployed and their
roles in the missions, inter alia.

Further, we will move forward with programmes
of training on issues of gender and human rights for
contingents that are soon to be deployed. That will
include developing curricula that consider the gender
perspective in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, by
integrating both women in the contingents and women
in the local population.
Finally, in the Argentine National Centre for Joint
Training for Peacekeeping Operations, the annual
curriculum will include an international seminar on
gender and peacekeeping operations, an initiative has
no precedent at the international level.

I wish to stress the importance that Argentina
affords to the systematization of international
information on the matter so as to ensure the effective
implementation of this standard, which is a valuable
guide for ensuring respect for the human rights of
women in conflict situations and makes visible the
important contribution of the inclusion of the gender
perspective in peacebuilding processes.

To conclude, my delegation wishes to take this
opportunity to once again commend Ms. Michelle
Bachelet on her being named to the helm of the new
gender entity, UN Women. We wish her the greatest
success in her work, and we are convinced that the
problems of women and peace and security will gain
visibility and will make firm progress under her
leadership.

