Ms. Mehdiyeva (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to commend the French presidency for holding
this important open debate on women and peace and
security. We also thank the briefers for their statements.

The women and peace and security agenda has
gained significant momentum since resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted. As such, the Security Council has
paid increasing attention to the issue by acknowledging
that combating impunity, addressing past violations
and asserting the principles of the rule of law underpin
efforts to build peace and stability. Among other areas,
it is important to continue paying close attention to the
gender consequences of the breakdown of the rule of
law during and after conflict.

While genuine strides have been made in
strengthening the political will and international legal
framework needed to secure justice and deal with
conflict-related sexual violence, there is still a need
for greater focus on the full range of violations and
serious crimes experienced by women, including such
matters as forced disappearances, foreign occupation,
mass forced displacements and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure. There must be no tolerance for
such acts. Combating impunity and strengthening the
responses of both international and national justice are
critically important in that regard.

Against that backdrop, it is curious that the
representative of Armenia 4 the country that bears
primary responsibility for unleashing the war and
perpetrating the aggression against Azerbaijan and has
been carrying out ethnic cleansing on a massive scale
and committing other serious crimes during the conflict,
including against women and children - should
take the floor in the Security Council, and attempt to
lecture others and voice groundless accusations against
my country.

Suffice it to say that the attack and capture of
the town Khojaly in the Nagorno Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan in February 1992 involved the brutal killing
of hundreds of Azerbaijanis, including 83 children and
106 women. Thousands of civilians were wounded and
taken hostage, and many remain missing. The town
was razed to the ground, and the level of brutality in
Khojaly was indeed shocking. Atrocities included
scalping, beheading, the bayoneting of pregnant women
and mutilation of bodies. Seventy-eight of the mutilated
were minors. Six families were exterminated. Twenty-
five children lost both parents, and 130 children lost one
parent. The impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators
of the crimes committed in the course of the Armenian
aggression not only impedes progress in achieving the
long-awaited peace and reconciliation process, but also
aggravates the situation on the ground.

In April of last year, the armed forces of Armenia
stepped up their firing from their positions in the
occupied territories, thereby subjecting the armed
forces of Azerbaijan along the line of contact and the
adjacent densely populated areas under the control
of Azerbaijan to intense fire with heavy artillery
and large-calibre weapons. As a result, 34 towns and
villages in Azerbaijan were shelled, causing casualties
among civilians, as well as destroying or substantially
damaging private and public property, including
residences, schools and kindergartens.

Armenia should therefore be the last to comment
on such notions as women and peace and security and
human rights. Azerbaijan will continue its efforts to
eliminate the consequences ofthe Armenian aggression,
with a view to achieving a political settlement of the
conflict based on international law and ensuring peace
and justice in the region.

The meeting rose at 8.20 pm.
