Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this public meeting of the Security Council
on the issue of women and peace and security in the
Sahel, which is a true priority for us. Your presence,
Madam Minister, attests to that. It is both a privilege
and a pleasure to see you here among us once again
to preside over this important meeting. I would also
like to warmly thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, and the African Union Special
Envoy for Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta
Diop, for their enlightening briefings. The presence
of the Deputy Secretary-General, following an
important mission, shows the special importance of
today's meeting.

In view of the commitment of the French and
German authorities to promoting peace, security and
development in the Sahel and to strengthening the
women and peace and security agenda, I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of France and
Germany. I would like to welcome my colleague and
friend Christoph Heusgen, who is with us here today.

We welcome the recent joint visit by the Deputy
Secretary-General and the Special Envoy of the
African Union with which you, Madam President,
are associated. That visit is a concrete example of the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, which enables us today to address the situation
ofwomen in the Sahel region in a timely manner. We also
welcome the presence in the delegation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, and several
United Nations representatives for gender equality. In
that context, we wish to convey three main messages.

Our first message is based on our belief that only
action that combines politics, security, development
and women's rights can promote lasting stabilization
in the Sahel. That is the shared compass that guides
the efforts of France and Germany, which are firmly
committed to peace and security in the Sahel.

France is first of all politically active through
the role it plays in international mediation in support
of the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. France also plays a role
in security through the deployment of Operation
Barkhane and the support given to the Joint Force of
the Group of Five (G-5) for the Sahel, which includes
the recent appointment of a gender expert in the G-5
Sahel secretariat in Nouakchott. That appointment will
be decisive in strengthening the protection of women
by the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. Germany is also firmly
committed to Mali and the Sahel, namely, through
its important contribution to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and its development and humanitarian assistance.

That commitment to peace and security in the
Sahel is essential to effectively combating the violence
to which women are too often exposed in the region. As
noted by United Nations actors on the ground in Mali,
women are increasingly targeted by groups committing
terrorist acts and promoting violent extremism. In
the Lake Chad basin region, particularly in Chad and
the Niger, we also see that Boko Haram still poses a
serious threat to people, especially women and girls.
Finally, we strongly condemn the systematic use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war in South Sudan,
which is absolutely unacceptable. In that regard, we
thank Special Representative Pramila Patten for all
her efforts to improve the situation. The commitments
made in the communiques must be implemented and
those efforts should make it possible to effectively
combat impunity, including within the armed forces
and police; to set up units trained to protect women;
and to enable those who survive such abuses to bear
witness in order to better counter the stigmatization of
the victims of sexual violence.

Our second message concerns the fact that our

shared mission is to act together to achieve sustainable
development in the Sahel and among its most vulnerable
populations, especially women, which of course
includes the fight against climate change. The Alliance
for the Sahel, which France and Germany launched
nearly one year ago, on 13 July 2017, in partnership
with the main donors and countries in the region, aims
to promote faster, more coordinated and better targeted
assistance for all disadvantaged groups, especially
women. The Alliance is part of the broader framework
established by the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel to coordinate efforts for the development
of the Sahel. I would like to take advantage of the
presence of the Deputy Secretary-General to stress how
much we support and appreciate her work to promote
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. That common framework must
guide all our efforts aimed at generating coordinated
and effective action that will produce tangible results
for the Sahelian people, in particular women.

Our third message deals more specifically with
women's participation in regional peace processes.
While progress has been made in that regard, women's
participation in peace processes remains insufficient.
We must be clear-headed enough to acknowledge that
and courageous enough to rectify the situation. In Mali,
for example, we believe that a lasting settlement of the
crisis depends on the involvement of all parts of Malian
society, in particular women, who must be involved
not only in Government, but also in Parliament and
at the local level. That is why France and Germany
stress the importance of the participation of Malian
women's organizations in the implementation of the
peace agreement. That request was also made by the
Security Council in its resolution 2423 (2018), which
was adopted at the end of June.

In conclusion, I recall that France and Germany
call for the systematic and long-term promotion of the
capacity ofwomen, especially in Africa, to be involved in
peace processes and, more broadly, political processes.
Let me be clear - that objective is not just one element
among others or talking points, but rather a fundamental
priority that is hard-wired in our hard drive in order to
achieve parity and effectiveness. For that reason, our
two countries support the initiative undertaken by the
African Union to establish an African Women Leaders
Network, and we encourage all Member States to join
that initiative by, for example, joining the Group of
Friends of the African Women Leaders Network, of
which Ghana and Germany are co-Chairs. In the same
vein, we commend the commitment of the International
Organization of the Francophonie and its efforts to
support francophone women's initiatives.

