Mrs. Booto (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I wish at the outset to convey to
you, Sir, our warm congratulations on your effective
guidance of the Security Council's work in October. I
should especially like to express my delegation's
appreciation to the delegation of Ghana for taking the
initiative of organizing this meeting on women, peace
and security towards an effective and coherent
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which is the
subject of today's debate.

My delegation fully endorses the statement made
by the representative of Zambia on behalf of the
Southern Africa Development Community.

The Beijing Platform for Action highlighted the
need to achieve gender equality through systematic
national and international gender mainstreaming
strategies. The twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly allowed us to make a little progress
towards gender equality and improving conditions for
women.

The implementation of the pioneering resolution
1325 (2000), one aim of which is to integrate the
gender dimension into all aspects of peace and security,
has important objectives. It will entail, inter alia,
establishing institutions capable of ensuring the
protection of women and girls and their full
participation in national, regional and international
mechanisms for the prevention, management and
settlement of disputes. The fulfilment of those aims
will depend to a large extent on a well-motivated and
sustained intervention by Member States, with the
active support and cooperation of the United Nations
and other partners, including the mobilization and
participation of civil society. In that regard,
Governments are called on to make the necessary
efforts to strengthening women's capacities to
contribute fully with their knowledge and skills.

My delegation shares the view already expressed
by other delegations that it is also important for the
Secretary-General to consider appointing more women
as special representatives and envoys to conduct good-
offices missions in his name, and to seek to increase
the role and contribution of women in United Nations
operations on the ground as military observers, civilian
police personnel, human rights specialists and
members of humanitarian operations. Substantial
progress has been achieved, but additional effort must
be made to remove the last remaining obstacles to the
full implementation of the resolution.

Violence against women and girls remains a
major concern, calling for greater effort on the part of
the entire international community, because such
violence, as a violation of human rights, represents a
major obstacle to implementing gender equality.
Echoing the Secretary-General's in-depth study on all
forms of violence against women, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 61/143 on intensifying
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against
women, which called on Member States and United
Nations entities to step up their action to prevent and
eliminate such violence. The Security Council replied
to that appeal by keeping that issue on its agenda and
reaffirming its commitment to implementing resolution
1325 (2000).

During a series of visits to my country, Council
members were able to assess the efforts of the new
freely and democratically elected Congolese
authorities. They had in particular an opportunity to
gain an overview of the security situation. My
delegation is highly concerned at the moment by the
increased and unprecedented violence perpetrated by
armed militias in the eastern part of the country. Such
acts of violence, particularly sexual violence -
systematic attacks on Congolese women and girls -
are motivated by the inveterate need of the perpetrators
to destroy an entire nation by assaulting the dignity and
physical and moral integrity of its women.

Faced with that situation, my country's
institutions in implementation of the law on sexual
violence adopted by Parliament and enacted by the
President of the Republic in 2006, are firmly resolved
to crack down on all crimes of sexual violence and will
ensure care for the victims. The Head of State himself
is determined to come down very hard on the culprits
behind such aberrations. He has made security one of
his priorities in putting an end to such barbarous acts.

In that respect, support is vital if we are to give
the regular forces substantive means of dealing with
those armed groups. The militias operate with the
financial and political support of foreign actors
involved in the looting of our natural resources, which
to this very day remains the major factor behind the
longevity of the conflict.

Some countries have made systematic rape a
weapon of war and have used HIV-infected soldiers in
their sordid business of sexual violence against women
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. One of the
most catastrophic consequences - the transmission of
HIV/AIDS - continues to sow desolation in my
country. The brutality of such rapes has also caused
numerous cases of fistula, entailing the total
destruction of the reproductive system. Although it
deprives thousands of victims of sexual violence of
their vitality and their hope, that scourge does not
make front-page headlines.

In that regard, I wish to pay tribute to the First
Lady of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mrs. Olive Lembe Kabila, who, as a mother and
woman of action, has become directly involved in
appealing to the conscience of all in such cases. She
has played an active role in the campaign organized by
the national programme for reproductive health and is
caring for victims of sexual violence, with the support
of medical agencies and teams providing pro bono
surgery for victims. The campaign has also sought to
inform the national community of the existence of that
disorder and above all to educate political actors about
the disasters caused by armed conflict.

I take this opportunity to recall once again that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo attaches special
importance to the contribution of women to the
promotion of peace and in all areas of life. We
vigorously condemn all sexual violence in all armed
conflicts, as well as all sexual assault and exploitation
committed by any party whatsoever, including United
Nations personnel. We stress the need to eradicate
impunity. If we are to eliminate this scourge, it is
important to take preventative measures and to punish
the perpetrators. My delegation therefore supports the
zero-tolerance policy adopted by the Secretary-
General.

In conclusion, I thank members of the Council for
their significant contributions to the efforts to
re-establish lasting peace and reconciliation in my
country. My delegation hopes that this Security
Council debate will contribute to strengthening
awareness of the importance of the role of women in
maintaining peace and security and in peacebuilding.

