Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own
country, Norway.

Trafficking in persons is one of the greatest human
rights challenges ofourtime. Such crimes are committed
by organized criminal networks and armed groups on
an increasingly large scale, sometimes supported by
State actors, often with impunity. Billions of dollars
are generated each year - money that fuels conflict
and hampers development. Human trafficking takes
on various forms of exploitation. We know that women
and children are particularly vulnerable. Armed groups
and criminal networks abuse women and children for
sexual slavery, forced labour or as child soldiers. For
terrorist groups like the so-called Islamic State, Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida, trafficking and slavery are tools
to humiliate and frighten enemies and to make money
for their operations. We have all seen the horrific
reports of abuse from the areas where they operate.

The Secretary General's report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2016/361/Rev.1) documents that
smugglers are requiring sex as payment of passage.
The report confirms that there is an evolving criminal
infrastructure designed to exploit refugees and
migrants through human trafficking and sexual slavery.
It will require a strong and concerted international
effort to oppose such powerful criminal networks.
International organizations and instruments such as
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime must be better utilized to ensure
effective international cooperation across borders and
regions. Civil society also has a key role to play. As
human trafficking and armed conflicts are converging
and becoming global security challenges, we need
to develop combined tools from the security and
development communities.

We need to improve cooperation through data-
sharing and monitoring between countries and across
United Nations entities. We need better gender
aggregated data and documentation in order to develop
effective responses and services for victims of sexual
exploitation. The Secretary-General's reports and
today's open debate are important steps forward. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development also gives
us an important platform to tackle trafficking in a more
holistic manner. Sustainable Development Goal 16 on
peaceful societies specifically calls for the end to abuse,
exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence and
torture against and of children.

The Nordic countries are strongly committed to
tackling all forms of trafficking and organized crime.
We are already deeply engaged in anti-trafficking
programmes, in partnership with developing
countries and regional organizations. We believe that
strengthening multilateral cooperation and partnerships
are the only way to put an end to the deadly business of
human trafficking.
