Ms. Flores (Honduras): My delegation expresses
its appreciation to the presidency of the Security
Council and to the Government of Spain for organizing
this open debate devoted to women and peace and
security. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
work on the annual reports on landmark resolution
1325 (2000) as the normative framework on which,
after 15 years, there is now a glimmer of progress and
achievement - which nevertheless still falls short of
many objectives to which we aspire.

Today, we must agree upon and make effective the
recommendations made by United Nations departments,
agencies, funds and programmes, as well as by national
Governments and civil society organizations, to
move forward steadily in outlining the course ahead.
Honduras believes that women are the critical missing
link in our global pact to attain sustainable development
through a culture of peace. More than half of the
world's population cannot be relegated to the sidelines
or excluded from decisions and events that affect their
lives and those of the next generations entrusted to
them. Moral and human rights require that women
exercise their freedom, liberty and choice and become
equal participants and partners in issues related to
conflict prevention, resolution and recovery. The only
way to fully empower women is to ensure that women
empower themselves through the full exercise of their
economic and political rights, which are fundamental
to dignity, security and well-being for all.

Women must take action to secure their livelihoods
so that they can take care of their dependants, children
and elders, who are the most vulnerable of humankind.
In the twenty-first century, that is only possible by
bridging the gaps in gender equality through access
to education and technology. In that endeavour,
UN-Women plays an essential role. Funding for this
entity and for all agencies that have a direct impact
on women must be significantly increased, with an
emphasis on a renewed, effective and measurable
commitment.

We have witnessed the birth of a transformational
agenda. The key to global success in its implementation
lies in the synergy and the architecture and framework
of the Organization, with the full inclusion and
participation of women across the board. In our
responsibility as framers and drivers of this ambitious
agenda, first and foremost, we must commit to the
restructuring of this house, the United Nations, through
an inclusive and holistic reform, with women at the
forefront. We await a call from within the United Nations
and from the leaders of all Member States, particularly
the five permanent members of the Security Council,
to lead by example, to remain true to the Charter of
the United Nations, to elect a female Secretary-General
and to work towards an agreement to relinquish the
veto power in resolutions on matters in which women
must be protected, supported and empowered.

Member States must be encouraged to create
effective and achievable national action plans to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). Women must
be lead actors and participants in the drafting and
implementation of those plans, in which the local reality
in every household and community must be taken into
account. If empowered locally, women will impact
globally. Women must be active participants in critical
areas, such as the rule oflaw, justice, governance, peace
negotiations and agreements, and nation-building and
must contribute to the transformation of the security
sector.

Given the alarming escalation in the number of
cases of femicide, sexual and gender-based violence
and human trafficking, together with the emerging
threats of extremism and gender terrorism, action is
urgently needed to counter the devastating effects
on all humankind. A special task force that includes
women's vision and leadership is required in framing
a targeted action plan that can achieve a cultural shift
towards more balanced and harmonious societies.

Last and most important, it is only through an
awareness and a recognition of the traditional role
played by women and their impact on culture and
heritage that we will bequeath a culture of peace to the
next generation. Women have strong connections to
traditions that can be traced back to ancient civilizations.
Indigenous women, who are often hampered by
sociocultural barriers, are wise and knowledgeable.
They share the aches and pains of mother Earth.

In their inherited collective wisdom, women possess
innate abilities as healers, mediators, intermediators
and peacemakers. With that acknowledgment, let
us rediscover in and through women the enormous
contribution that women can make with respect to all
global issues, for they are the true heroines of peace.

