Ms. Stott Despoja (Australia): Australia thanks
Argentina for convening this open debate on women
and peace and security, and for drawing the Council's
attention to the specific risks and challenges
faced by some of the most vulnerable members of
society - displaced women and girls. We also thank
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for their commitment to
implementing the Council's women and peace and
security agenda. We also thank the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons and
Ms. Suaad Allami for sharing with us the extraordinarily
harsh realities facing refugee and internally displaced
women and girls in conflict.

We commend the Council's adoption today of a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/21) focused on
these issues.

The world is facing more simultaneous major crises
than at any time since the Second World War. Civilians
are direct targets in military strategies that aim to wipe
out entire populations and to terrorize civilians. Critical
civilian infrastructure, such as schools and hospitals, is
being deliberately targeted. More people are displaced
and more humanitarian workers are being targeted than
ever before.

Against this terrifying backdrop, it is women and
girls who are being disproportionately affected and
harmed. As we have heard, of the more than 51 million
displaced people around the world, the majority are
women and girls. As they flee, many face the risk of
Violence, human rights violations and abuses, as well as
deprivation and discrimination. They face increasing
risks of preventable disease as basic services fail under
the strain of displacement and crisis. And women's
existing vulnerabilities are exacerbated: child, early
and forced marriages increase; economic opportunities
are undermined, which increases women and girls'
exposure to sex or labour trafficking; and girls'
education is disrupted at a higher rate than that of boys,
affecting their opportunities over their lifetimes.

We must ensure that our responses address women's
and girls' specific vulnerabilities to sexual and gender-
based violence. We must focus on improving prevention
and response efforts, while supporting the efforts
of civil society and other human rights defenders,
strengthening accountability and access to justice and
ensuring access to a full range of services - medical,
legal psychosocial and health services, including sexual
and reproductive health.

Australia recognizes this is a significant issue,
and more practical support on the ground is needed.
Since 2013 Australia has provided $3 million to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to support delivery of the Action against
Sexual and Gender-based Violence Strategy. The
Strategy coordinates actors operating on the ground
and supports civil society to implement prevention and
response strategies. We have also provided $4 million
to strengthening the International Committee of the
Red Cross response to sexual violence.

Increased exposure to sexual violence also exposes
women and girls to dire health risks. Services that enable
the safe termination of pregnancies from conflict-
related rape, and access to HIV-testing and counselling
services are fundamental to helping survivors of sexual
violence restore their lives.

In 2007, Australia supported the establishment
of the Sexual and Reproductive Health Programme
in Crisis and Post Crisis Settings * known as the
"SPRINT" initiative - and has since provided
$10.2 million to fund the initiative. Only last month,
Australia provided $2 million to the United Nations
Population Fund to support hundreds of thousands
of women and girls affected by the ongoing violence
in Iraq. We have also provided emergency obstetric
supplies for 780,000 women in Syria, as well as 57,000
dignity kits and reproductive health services.

Displaced women and girls are not merely Victims.
Their leadership and participation in preventing and
resolving conflict, as well as in reconstructing post-
conflict societies, must be harnessed. That includes
in refugee camps and displacement settings, where
women must play a central role in the design and
delivery of gender-sensitive programmes. Over the
2012-2016 period, Australia will provide $12 million to
the United Nations peacekeeping fund. There need to
be more projects focusing on women in peacebuilding,
particularly women's participation in political processes
and post-conflict planning.

We are still a long way from achieving the target of
spending 15 per cent of overall funds on gender equality.
More must also be done to ensure that displaced
women and girls have legal protections, and that they
can remove themselves legally from situations of
vulnerability. Citizenship rights must enable nationality
to pass from a mother to her children, and women and
girls must be provided access to identity documents.
To help relocate women and girls from danger, the
Australian Government provides specific resettlement
avenues through the Woman at Risk programme. Since
1989, Australia has resettled more than 14,500 refugee
women through that programme.

The lack of data on displacement, including sex-
and age-disaggregated data, affects our prevention and
response efforts. As Australia suggested during the
Council's Arria Formula meeting on the protection of
internally displaced persons, which Australia convened
with Chile in May, peacekeeping and other United
Nations missions should be required to monitor and
report on displacement-related developments.

In conclusion, next year, as we commemorate the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), Australia looks forward to the 2015 High-
level Review, which will enable us all to reflect on
the progress made, as well as the ongoing challenges
in implementing the Council's women and peace and
security agenda. We welcome the appointment of
Radhika Coomaraswamy, the author of the global
study entitled "Women, Peace and Security", and look
forward to working with her and the high-level advisory
team, as well as to further embedding the women and
peace and security agenda in the Council's work.

