Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to congratulate you
on convening today's important debate. I would also like
to thank the briefers for their invaluable contributions.

Egypt attaches great importance to the issue of
human trafficking. Egypt has always been and will
always be a pioneer in fighting all forms of slavery
and similar practices, such as indentured servitude,
recruitment by armed groups and forced labour. Egypt
believes that human trafficking is a criminal practice
that runs counter to recognized human values.

Egypt stresses that trafficking in humans follows
extremely diverse patterns which have becom
increasingly complex due to a growing number of
elements, including developments in information
and communications technology and the tactics used
by criminal groups to form organized networks that
traffick in humans. In addition, the lack of accurate and
reliable data and statistics allow for these crimes to be
committed in the dark, giving rise to billions of dollars
of profit.

Under Egyptian law, human trafficking is a hybrid
crime involving transnational organized crime networks
that commit other criminal acts such as terrorism,
drug trafficking, money-laundering, migrant- and
refugee-smuggling and the arms trade, all of which are
a constant threat to international peace and security.
In this regard, Egypt has ratified all regional and
international conventions and instruments related to
the subject. The national laws of Egypt include severe
punishments for crimes related to the different forms
of this practice. The national strategy to combat and
prevent human trafficking was launched in 2016 and
is the framework for transparent cooperation among
Government bodies and civil society in accordance
with the imperatives of national security.

Last December's adoption by the Security Council
ofresolution 2331 (2016), on human trafficking in armed
conflict, was an important landmark in the history of
the Council (see S/PV.7847). In this respect, we would
like to stress the following points. First, the Council
should address all forms of human trafficking equally
since, under the Palermo Protocol, they have equal
legal impacts. Secondly, the United Nations Convention
on Transnational Organized Crime and the Palermo
Protocol should serve as the basis of States' obligations
in relation to fighting human trafficking. The main
pillar of the Convention, related to exploitation, should
be implemented. Thirdly, the international community
should redouble its efforts to stop funding all terrorist
groups, including by stopping human trafficking, and
all international tools should be used in this respect.
Fourthly, human trafficking, particular the trafficking
in women and girls, should not be linked to religion,
nationality or civilization. Religious and traditional
leaders should play an important role in denouncing the
link between them that is being promoted by extremists.
Fifthly, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
plays a major role in the General Assembly - and
should play an even greater role - on the issue of
human trafficking. All financial resources should be
made available to the Office in order to enable it to
discharge its task.

Egypt stresses its full support for the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, which is the
governing framework for international cooperation in
this regard, not only for States but also for civil society
and the private sector. Egypt is looking forward to a
robust outcome document from the second review of the
Plan of Action next October. The Egyptian delegation
will actively engage in this review process.

