Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania) (spoke in French): Owing to the lateness of the hour, I will be
brief.

At the outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having organized this important meeting on women
and peace and security: sexual violence in situations of

08-3908]
armed conflict. I would also like to congratulate the
United States Secretary of State, Ms. Condoleezza
Rice, and the other ministers for their outstanding
statements and for having given them some of their
time to this important debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. Srgjan Kerim, President of the General Assembly,
and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for the particular
attention they are devoting to combating sexual
violence against women in armed conflict.

The presence this morning of a great number of
ministers from States members of the Security Council
was a sign of the importance that the Council attaches to
this issue, because sexual violence can, to varying
degrees, pose a threat to international peace and security.

In this respect, I would add the voice of
Mauritania to the chorus of those who have preceded
us to condemn the degrading and inhuman treatment
inflicted upon women through sexual violence
committed in armed conflict. Despite all of the legal
instruments - which Mauritania has ratified - and
despite the actions and initiatives taken by the
international community on the protection and
advancement of women, we must note that much
remains to be done. Women remain victims of the
abominable practice that is sexual violence.

We are against all forms of violence against
innocent civilian populations, all the more so when it is
women who are the victims. Islam, our holy religion,
orders us to cherish and protect women, who are after
all the mother, the sister, the wife, the daughter - in
short, those who are the dearest to us in human society.
Sexual violence against women exposes society as a
whole to serious dangers: early and unwanted
pregnancies for many women, HIV/AIDS infection for
mother and child, the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases, the total demoralization of women victims,
negative social repercussions for victims, and so on.

Statistics show that in recent armed conflicts it is
civilian populations, that is to say non-combatants,
who represent the majority of the victims. Women, who
are the main targets of sexual violence in these
conflicts, along with children, account for the greatest
number of victims.

In this face of this shameful phenomenon, the
international community should take all necessary
measures to put an end to it and adopt mechanisms
where zero-tolerance is required for perpetrators of
these abominable crimes against women, crimes which,
moreover, are not limited to a single region of the
world.

The Special Rapporteur on violence against
women has done remarkable work, but the persistence
of rape of women in armed conflict has reached a level
that requires a strengthening of the capacities of the
Office of the Special Rapporteur, particularly in human
resources; here, women should be the focus of the
choices that are made. That is why my delegation
believes that the proposal made by the Minister for
Development Cooperation of the Kingdom of Belgium
to appoint a woman special investigator on sexual
violence is appropriate as an effective means for
eradicating this practice.

Women must also play an active role in
peacekeeping operations. Such participation is
currently limited; this is especially linked to language
issues. To work for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur as a military adviser, it is
not enough to speak two official languages of the
United Nations. This linguistic obstacle must be
overcome to allow women who have the qualifications
and who speak at least two United Nations languages
to apply for a post in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations if they wish.

