Mrs. DiCarlo (Unites States of America): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, Executive Director
Bachelet and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for
their briefings and their commitment to the women,
peace and security agenda. I thank Ms. Diop for her
remarks today, and especially for carrying the message
of the women of Goma and Bukavu. We agree with her;
we must not let them down.

As we mark the twelfth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we can point to real progress.
United Nations mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding increasingly tap the expertise and
address the concerns of women. Peace processes
include greater outreach to women. More countries are
developing their own national action plans on women,
peace and security, yet our work is very far from
complete. We must continue to increase out collective
efforts to address the challenges women face in conflict
and post-conflict situations, and civil society groups
can play a crucial role in peace and security initiatives.

The participation of women in peace and political
processes is central to long-term peace and stability.
We see that more than half of all peace agreements
fail within five years. While the reasons for failure
are complex and unique to each conflict, there is
one common thread, historically: a lack of women's
participation.

Of the hundreds of peace agreements signed in the
past 20 years, a sampling ofthose treaties shows that less
than 8 per cent of negotiators were women. Research
suggests that women who participate in peace talks often
raise issues like human rights, citizen security, justice,
employment and health care - issues that are key to
long-term recovery and stability but which are often
ignored. Civil society can be instrumental in increasing
the participation of women in these processes. Just this
month in Afghanistan, for example, over two hundred
representatives from Afghan civil society, political
parties, Government, provincial councils, the religious
community and the High Peace Council gathered for
the national conference for strengthening the role of
women in the peace process. They discussed increased
participation of women in reconciliation efforts, greater
protection for Afghan women and the importance of
compliance with resolution 1325 (2000) by the Afghan
Government. The delegates are currently drafting
an action plan to drive genuine progress for Afghan
women.

The United Nations has made important strides
in advancing women's roles in security, governance
and civic life. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that greater attention should be
devoted to women's empowerment and rights when
establishing or renewing mission mandates. And we
commend him for placing more women in leadership
positions and increasing the number of gender advisers
in the field. Their support to local civil society groups
has been critical, and it is clear that the United Nations
can have a significant impact when it partners with
civil society. UN-Women's Fund for Gender Equality
typifies that approach by partnering with regional,
national and local women's organizations as well as
with Government institutions to get more women
engaged economically and politically.

It is encouraging, moreover, to see that more
women parliamentarians are elected to office during
transitional periods where there is United Nations
assistance. Libya's landmark elections on 7 July had
record levels of women's participation, with over six
hundred women candidates running for the national
congress. And yet United Nations budgets remain well
below the agreed 15 per cent recommendation in the
Secretary-General's action plan to ensure women's
participation in post-conflict recovery. Ifthat continues,
recent progress could stagnate. We must find ways to
accelerate progress on that front.

UN-Women's focus on women's leadership and
political participation has produced concrete results,
and we look forward to the forthcoming report of
the Secretary-General on implementation of General
Assembly resolution 66/130, on women and political
participation. We are also grateful for the work on
women's political participation by the Human Rights
Council Working Group on Discrimination against
Women in Law and Practice.

The United States remains deeply concerned about
violence targeted at women and girls, especially sexual
violence. Not only is it horrific for the victims, but it
tears apart the fabric of societies. As Secretary Clinton
has said, these acts are not cultural but criminal. In the
peace and security context, they are not simply women's
issues, but, rather, fundamental problems that must be
addressed for societies to reconcile, rebuild and find
peace.

We applaud the efforts made by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to prevent violence
against women in armed conflict by working to devise
innovative procedures such as random patrols in areas
commonly used by women and girls for gathering
firewood or water.

Beyond sharing best practices and lessons learned,
we need to do more to standardize mission-wide
strategies and policies, improve redeployment training
for peacekeepers, address victims' needs and hold
perpetrators accountable. That is why United Nations
campaigns such as Stop Rape Now are so important.

The work of resolution 1325 (2000) is a national
responsibility. Less than year ago, President Obama
issued the first-ever United States national action plan
on women, peace and security. Based on wide-ranging
consultations with American civil society and with
other Governments, our action plan lays out how
the United States will help empower half the world's
population as equal partners in preventing conflict and
building peace. Partnering with civil society groups is
a key component of this strategy.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the international
community has made progress in including women
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, tackling the
scourge of sexual violence in conflict and making
national commitments to act. But much more needs to
be done so that the world fully sees women as actors,
not victims, and as leaders, not followers.

