Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): My delegation fully
associates itself with the statement delivered earlier by
the observer of the European Union.

We wish to thank you, Madam President, as well
as France for taking the leadership in organizing this
annual debate on women and peace and security. It
is indeed crucial that the Security Council continue
to systematically and consistently advance a holistic
women and peace and security agenda in its work and
decision-making, and we certainly do not take it for
granted that 17 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we still have points to focus on. Indeed, we
need to redouble our efforts to ensure that the resolution
and our work really matter and that it is implemented
in a manner that makes a difference for the people on
the ground. I would like to thank the Chef de Cabinet of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti,
for her briefing, and the other briefers for their very
insightful, very practical and extremely interesting
contributions to today's debate. In particular, I would
like to acknowledge the significance of UN-Women and
the importance that this entity plays in making sure that
there is stronger engagement with the Member States,
and with the Security Council in particular.

Furthermore, we would like to commend the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/861), but, more
important, for his strong commitment and leadership
related not only to the issue of gender parity but also
specifically to the women and peace and security agenda,
pursuant to the recommendations and commitments
made at the 2015 high-level review, in the global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
in resolution 2242 (2015). We welcome and strongly
support the Secretary-General's vision of peace and
security grounded in long-term conflict prevention,
inclusivity and gender equality, as well as his victim-
centred approach to preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse. I would add that we were very happy to see
that the Secretary-General decided to spend United
Nations Day with people on the ground, in particular
in the Central African Republic, where these issues
are perhaps more important than in other parts of the
world. That focus is certainly very much appreciated.

I would like to welcome the practical innovations
at the level of the Security Council, such as the
convening of experts in the Informal Expert Group and
the inclusion of women civil-society representatives
in country-specific briefings. At the margins of the
general debate of the General Assembly, new initiatives
on gender parity and conflict prevention were launched
in which my country also participated. The second
meeting of the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Points Network took place in September with an
important focus on conflict prevention, the security
sector and its integration in national action plans and
national strategies on women, peace and security. Also,
the heads of the armed forces of approximately 100
Member States met at the United Nations this year to
discuss the issue of increasing the number of female
peacekeepers and integrating the gender perspective.

As the French delegation stated in its concept note
(S/2017/889, annex), despite the substantial efforts
undertaken to implement the women and peace and
security agenda and the progress that has been made
in the past 17 years, critical challenges remain, ranging
from increasing the number of women at the highest
levels of decision-making to ending impunity for
gender-based violence. Moreover, gender-responsive
and protective environments for women remain lacking,
and women, peace and security efforts continue to be
unpredictably undervalued and underfunded. These are
areas where we believe we need to further enhance our
concerted efforts.

We are of the View that four of the themes of the
women and peace and security agenda - participation,
conflict prevention, protection, and relief and
recovery - need accelerated attention and action by the
United Nations and its Member States. I should also like
to highlight other critical areas, such as disarmament,
efforts to create greater space for women's civil-society
organizations and the need for stronger information and
analyses on women, peace and security. The current
refugee challenges create specific environments for
women, and further action is necessary to address
women's lives in those conditions. Last but not least, it
is of the utmost importance that we collectively make
progress on the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), especially SDGs 5 and 16,
while recognizing gender equality and peaceful, just
and inclusive societies as global development priorities.

Slovakia is currently in the process of drawing up
its national action plan on women, peace and security.
Meanwhile, the Government continues to promote
all national efforts aimed at strengthening the role
of women in society through the national gender-
equality strategy for the period 2014-2019 and the
gender-equality action plan. In addition, the Ministry
of Defence has approved its own gender-equality plan,
with its implementation under the responsibility of the
general staff of the armed forces and with sustained,
allocated funding.

As one of the Chairs of the Group of Friends of
Security Sector Reform (SSR), Slovakia wishes to
re-emphasizethatthisparticularaspect-security-sector
reform - is essential to post-conflict peacebuilding
and to creating the conditions needed for reconstruction
and development. At present, the United Nations
supports a rapidly expanding range of field missions
aimed at assisting national and regional efforts in SSR,
particularly at the sector-wide level.

Resolution 2151 (2014), on security-sector reform,
underscored the importance of women's equal and
effective participation and full involvement in all
stages of the security-sector reform process. I wish to
stress that gender-sensitive security-sector reform is
key to developing security-sector institutions that are
non-discriminatory, representative of the population
and capable of effectively responding to the specific
security needs of diverse groups. A United Nations
approach to SSR must be gender-sensitive throughout
its planning, design, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation phases.
Security-sector reform must also include the
reform of recruitment processes and improvement in
the delivery of security services so as to address and
prevent sexual and gender-based violence. There is a
need for sharper focus on developing gender-sensitive
SSR strategies and achieving tangible results in the
field. With that aim in mind, my country is planning to
host a workshop in New York in early 2018 specifically
dedicated to the issue of gender in relation to the
SSR strategies.

In conclusion, the United Nations is facing
unprecedented challenges to global peace and security.
Civilians, most of all women and girls, are paying the
highest price in the face of systematic violence and
oppression. We all need to redouble our efforts to deliver
changes on the ground in favour of women and girls, in
particular in societies in conflict-affected areas.

