Ms. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 10 member States of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my
own country, Viet Nam.

We commend your initiative, Madam President,
to convene this annual open debate on women and
peace and security. We are grateful for the detailed and
comprehensive reports and briefings by the Secretary-
General, the Assistant Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women.

ASEAN is heartened by the progress made in the
implementation of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and
the subsequent relevant resolutions, as outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/693). The role
of women and issues related to women, including sexual
and gender-based violence, gender equality and social
exclusion, have been increasingly integrated in relevant
mechanisms and regimes. Women's participation in
peace and security issues has been growing across the
spectrum. The normative framework has been gradually
strengthened and enforced on the ground.

However, there is no room for complacency.
More conflicts are raging. More women and girls are
fleeing their homes. Basic services are badly needed,
especially in health care and education. Sexual violence
and organized crime targeting women and girls are still
a source of serious concern in many regions. Gaps in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) remain to
be addressed as we tackle new challenges.

ASEAN is deeply concerned about the increasing
number of refugees, internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and stateless people. According to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
51.2 million people were forcibly displaced in 2013, a
staggering 6 million more than the number only a year
before. When basic institutions are in tatters, one cannot
hope for better basic services for women and girls, let
alone ways to address their specific health care needs.
Of further concern is the fact that immediate security
needs and chaos may force the normative framework
and efforts for the protection of women and girls to be
neglected and relegated to obscurity. ASEAN therefore
welcome the initiative by Argentina to focus on the
issue of women and girls as refugees and IDPs.

As we are about to review 15 years of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), ASEAN
finds it imperative that the international community,
with the United Nations playing a central role, renew
our commitment to promote the framework on women
and peace and security. ASEAN believes those efforts
should focus on the following areas.

First, it goes without saying that, in addressing
issues that women face in conflict settings, we must
deal with the conditions that give rise to conflicts
in the first place. Conflict prevention mechanisms,
especially those under United Nations auspices, should
be promoted. Political reconciliation, the rule of law,
socioeconomic development and poverty eradication
are the foundations for sustainable opportunities for
women and girls. Institutions for gender equality and
respect for human rights at the national and international
levels should be continuously strengthened.

Secondly, women's participation in peace and
security matters, especially at decision-making levels,
must be enhanced. Their involvement has indeed
been proven to be a vital factor in securing peace
and promoting reconciliation in many instances. It is
therefore essential to mainstream gender-sensitive
approaches in promoting more inclusive and effective
responses to conflicts, displacement and other
humanitarian emergencies. With well-targeted actions
to address their specific needs and ensure their full and
meaningful participation at all levels, women and girls
can thrive as both survivors and leaders.

Thirdly, normative standards on women and peace
and security should be further integrated into the
relevant regional and national mechanisms. Efforts
by ASEAN in the contex of the work of the ASEAN
Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights, the
ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and Protection
of the Rights of Women and Children and regional
workshops on women and peace and security are cases
in point.

F ourthly, our understanding of many issues relating
to women and peace and security and the way forward
rely heavily on clear, current, accurate and verifiable
data. It is important, therefore, that due care continue
to be taken to ensure the integrity of data before reports
emanating from the United Nations are released.

Finally, ASEAN looks forward to the upcoming
comprehensive review of the 15 years of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) by various
United Nations entities, Member States and civil
society. We welcome the global study announced by
Ireland, the United Arab Emirates and UN-Women last
month as a contribution to that process. ASEAN finds
it most important that the review gather best practices,
examine challenges and propose concrete measures
for more effective implementation of the relevant
resolutions and frameworks.

Let me conclude by reiterating ASEAN's
commitment to working closely with Member States, the
United Nations and regional organizations in our joint
efforts to safeguard the rights and promote the role of
women in conflict-related situations. That commitment
stems from our collective understanding that, as women
and girls are better off, so is all humankind.

