The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, the Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Denmark, Egypt, El
Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, the Gambia, Germany,
Ghana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malawi, Monaco,
Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
the Philippines, Portugal, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay and Viet Nam, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/20lO/549 and
which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the Security Council open debate that will be
held on Tuesday, 26 October 2010, on women and
peace and security."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I invite the following
briefers under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure: Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Under-Secretary-
General for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women; Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; and Mr. Hamidon Ali,
President of the Economic and Social Council.

It is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Gabon, in
which he requests that the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, His Excellency
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item in accordance with rule 39 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Walter Fiillemann, Permanent Observer and head
of the delegation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

It is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Turkey, in
which he requests that the NATO Civilian Liaison
10-60258
Officer to the United Nations, Ms. Eirini Lemos-
Maniati, be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Thelma Awori of the Civil Society Advisory Group
to the United Nations on Women, Peace and Security.

It is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I wish to warmly
welcome the Deputy Secretary-General at this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/498, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on women and peace and
security. I also wish to draw members' attention to
document S/2010/466, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women's participation in
peacekeeping.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security. It was the first Security
Council resolution to address women's issues on the
international peace and security agenda. Member
States, the United Nations system, civil society and
parties to conflict were called upon, among other
things, to acknowledge the role and address the plight
of women in situations of armed conflict. Resolution
1325 (2000) also sought to protect women and girls
from violence, particularly sexual violence, in conflict
and post-conflict situations.

Uganda recognizes the progress that has been
made by the United Nations and the broader
international community towards enhancing the
participation of women in conflict resolution, peace
processes and post-conflict reconstruction. However,
there are still situations in which conflict continues to
have a devastating impact on women and girls.

As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), Uganda will move beyond the
reaffirmation of our common commitment to the
implementation of the resolution and make strong,
10-60258

time-bound and measurable commitments to action. It
is essential to empower women to enable them to
participate effectively in issues of peace, security and
development. The Government of Uganda has adopted
a deliberate policy for the empowerment of women
through affirmative action initiatives. These include
providing for one woman representative per district in
Parliament and for a third of local council executive
positions to be occupied by women, and awarding 1.5
additional points to female candidates for admission to
public universities, as well as ensuring universal
primary and secondary education for all children.
Through these initiatives, women's participation in
governance has been greatly enhanced.

Uganda launched its national action plan for
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), as well as
the Goma Declaration in December 2008. The action
plan highlights specific commitments and duties of the
Government and stakeholders and identifies priority
interventions for the short and medium terms. It also
apportions institutional responsibilities and establishes
a mechanism for coordination, monitoring and
reporting.

In the next five years, Uganda will be developing
a comprehensive national policy on gender-based
violence to guide prevention and responsiveness in all
situations, including in the humanitarian development
context. We shall establish sustainable and integrated
systems for collecting data on gender-based violence
and improve access to justice for victims and survivors.
We are also institutionalizing gender-based violence
training in key institutions for training security forces,
including those involved in peacekeeping missions.
Uganda is already carrying out wide-ranging reforms
to address the remaining gender inequalities and
violence against women in both the public and the
private sectors. We are also working on integrating the
principles of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
into the implementation, monitoring and evaluation
processes for our national development plan.

At the regional level, through the African Union,
the East African Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, Uganda is
committed to strengthening collaboration to enhance
women's participation and empowerment in conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution. We are
convinced that women have an important role in
ensuring durable peace, security and development.
3

The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members of
the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2010/22.

It is so decided.

I shall now invite the Council to hear a statement
by the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, who is travelling in Asia and will address
this meeting via a videotaped message.


