Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Allow me to join
everyone here in congratulating you and your country,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. In the
same vein, I would like to extend our gratitude for all
the information that we have received during the open
thematic debates on these very important topics.

I wish to begin by reaffirming the importance that
Botswana attaches to the protection and promotion of
the rights of women and children, as well as the need to
address all forms of violence against women, including
sexual violence in the context of armed conflict.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2013/149), which highlights actions
taken and challenges faced by States in conflict and
post-conflict situations to protect women and children
from sexual violence. My delegation further takes note
of the analysis that the report provides, as well as the
recommendations contained therein.

Sexual violence in armed conflict represents one
of the most serious forms of the violation or abuse
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The prevention of sexual violence in
armed conflict is therefore both a matter of upholding
universal human rights and of maintaining international
peace and security, in keeping with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

In that regard, Botswana welcomes the continued
focus by the Council on this thematic area and wishes
to emphasize the need for increased and more systemic
attention to the agenda women and peace and security
in the Council's work. We believe that efforts to address
sexual violence in armed conflict should be consistent
with and complementary to wider efforts to promote
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
other relevant resolutions on women and peace and
security. To that end, my delegation also welcomes the
work of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict in building coherence and coordination
in the United Nations response to sexual violence in
armed conflict. In that regard, Botswana supports the
Special Representative's focus on national ownership
and responsibility, by engaging with Governments
and armed groups to establish their commitment to
accountability for sexual violence, so as to create
procedures that will allow such commitments to be
systematically monitored. I would also like to emphasize
that greater coordination and collaboration with other
relevant stakeholders is important to improving global
efforts to address sexual violence.

The current report highlights several emerging
concerns, including sexual violence against men and
boys, particularly in the context of detention, as well as
the plight of children born out of rape, sexual slavery
and forced marriages by armed groups, as has been
documented in countries such as Mali, the Central
African Republic, Somalia and others. We also take note
of the parties named in the report, which includes the
following significant additions: the Syrian Government
forces and their allied militia, the Shabbiha; the Seleka
rebels in the Central African Republic; and several
armed groups in Mali. Additions to the existing listings
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, such as the
Police nationale congolaise, the Mouvement du 23 Mars
and several more Mai-Mai groups in the Kivus, have
also been noted.

Despite the international community's repeated
condemnation of sexual violence in armed conflict,
we remain deeply concerned about the fact that such
acts continue to occur and in some situations have even
become systematic and widespread. Impunity for sexual
violence by armed groups is unacceptable and cannot
be tolerated. In that regard, my delegation wishes to
stress the urgency and importance of demonstrating
commitment and political will through efforts to
prevent sexual violence and enforce accountability by
prosecuting those responsible for perpetrating crimes
against civilians. We therefore call on the Security
Council to continue its efforts to fight impunity and
uphold accountability. Through its relevant Sanctions
Committees, the Council should also consider the
possible effectiveness of existing sanctions regimes on
parties named in the report.

Botswana strongly supports the involvement
of women in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention. We are also supportive of calls for
addressing concerns about sexual violence in mediation
and peace processes, particularly in the context
of security arrangements and transitional justice
mechanisms. However, we believe that such efforts
should take into consideration the needs and rights
of women and children. I also wish to emphasize the
importance of enhancing efforts to eliminate obstacles
to women's access to justice, as well as of assisting
States in conflict and post-conflict situations in their
efforts to address sexual violence.

Ending violations of women's human rights is a
moral imperative and one we must collectively commit
to if we are to achieve it. In that regard, Botswana
strongly supports all efforts aimed at preventing and
eliminating violence against women and children,
including sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations. In conclusion, we remain optimistic that,
given our collective will, especially in the Security
Council, we can bring an end to such heinous crimes.

