Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): I would like to begin
by thanking the Russian Federation for organizing
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
Executive-Director of UN-Women and Ms. Lopidia for
their briefings.

Many positive steps have been taken to implement
the resolutions on women and peace and security.
However, despite those efforts, women are still a
minority in peace and security negotiations and in
peacekeeping operations. Our challenge remains
to fully implement the eight Council resolutions on
women and peace and security, including the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000). Women are proven agents of
change and should be able to do even more. Today's
conflicts continue to have a tragic feature in common.
Women and girls suffer their impact disproportionately
more because they are also targets of specific forms
of violence and abuse, including sexual violence and
exploitation. Efforts to resolve conflicts and address
their root causes should aim to empower all those who
have suffered from them, especially women.

Brazil was honoured to participate in the
foundational meeting of the women and peace and
security national focal points network that took place
at the margins of the General Assembly recent general
debate. As discussed at that meeting and underlined in
the global study for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), Member States and regional organizations
remain the most influential actors regarding the women
and peace and security agenda. We commend Spain for
its leadership in the creation of the network.

Women should play a crucial role in bolstering
conflict prevention. In the short-term, they can lead
efforts aimed at promoting pre-emptive dialogue and
early warning systems. In the long-term, they can
provide a more comprehensive understanding of the
causes and contribute to solutions to conflict. It is also
important to explore the synergies between the women
and peace and security agenda and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, particularly regarding
the implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 5, without losing sight of their specificities
and the integrity and universality of the Sustainable
Development Goals.

Over the past few years, the women and peace and
security agenda has been integrated into the political
mainstream of the United Nations. United Nations
entities, including UN-Women, the Committee on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women and the Commision on the Status of Women,
have contributed in that regard. Likewise, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and several rapporteurs of the
Human Rights Council have diligently worked to
strengthen that vital agenda. It would be inconceivable
today to establish a peacekeeping operation without
deploying gender advisers, without including a mandate
to protect women or without training peacekeepers to
prevent and combat sexual exploitation and abuse, as
highlighted by many countries in September during the
peacekeeping defence ministerial in London.

The complex humanitarian crises arising from
conflicts highlight the plight of women and girls who
have been subject to various forms of sexual violence and
forced abandonment of their homes and communities.
They have become refugees and internally displaced
persons. In that context, we should ensure that we give
particular attention to women and girls who belong
to more vulnerable groups, including indigenous or
older women, those with disabilities and members of
ethnic or religious minorities. Brazil remains strongly
engaged in the advancement of gender equality and
women empowerment issues at all levels and areas of
work of the United Nations.

Protection and empowerment are inseparable
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda.
At the international level, that includes formulating and
implementing the mandates of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, conducting peace
negotiations and handling peacebuilding, recovery
and humanitarian initiatives. At the domestic level,
Governments should be ready to redesign and improve
gender-sensitive policies.

Brazil has made considerable progress in the past
decade and remains a vocal advocate and staunch
supporter of United Nations efforts to advance the
women and peace and security agenda. Our South-
South cooperation is closely aligned with that agenda.
We have, for instance, supported projects to assist
Victims of sexual and gender-based violence in Guinea-
Bissau, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Haiti. The Brazilian Peace Operations Joint Training
Centre in Rio de J aneiro regularly holds workshops and
courses to train peacekeepers on gender issues and the
protection of women. Rigorous standards regarding the
conduct and discipline of personnel are upheld.

We are confident that our national efforts will
positively influence all of our activities in the
international arena. We are also finalizing our national
action plan on women and peace and security. It will
comprise measures, such as fostering the participation of
women in peace missions, that will further enhance the
relationship between troops and civilians, particularly
women and girls, in peace operations and provide
humanitarian assistance and technical cooperation to
post-conflict countries concerning gender issues. That
initiative will strengthen and build upon the provisions
of our national policy plan on women, which already
embraces several recommendations contained in
resolution 1325 (2000).

