Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank the French
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today's very important meeting on realizing the
promises of the women and peace and security agenda.

We thank the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN-Women and the
representatives of non-governmental organizations for
their briefings this morning.

The past couple of decades have witnessed a sharp
increase in the number of conflicts. Situations of
chronic instability, violence, armed conflict and wars
continue to affect women and girls disproportionately.
From sexual violence to sexual exploitation and abuse
inflicted by terrorist organizations and parties to the
conflict, women carry a disproportionate burden of
physical and psychological trauma during conflicts.
What is worse is that the exploitation of women and
girls is not an incidental by-product of conflict. It is an
instrument widely employed to humiliate and terrorize
civilians. According to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/861), sexual violence continues to be employed
as a tactic of war, with widespread and strategic rapes,
including mass rapes, allegedly committed by several
parties to armed conflicts. But to their credit, that has
not held women back. Across the globe, they have been
willing and able to share the burden of peacebuilding,
peacemaking and conflict prevention.

The Security Council and its global efforts to end
that dehumanizing practice have played a part in their
endeavour. The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) both
ushered in and institutionalized a new focus on women
in conflict, moving their participation and rights to
the front and centre of the political debate. Although
challenges remain daunting and many new protection
crises continue to emerge, our collective resolve to
stamp out the scourge provides a reason for hope. In that
regard, I would like to emphasize four specific points.

First, the Security Council, as the primary body
tasked with maintaining peace and security, should
focus on the root causes of conflict to remove the ground
where such crimes breed. Secondly, the United Nations
should play its unique role in enhancing cooperation
and coordination with the relevant bodies to help secure
for women their rightful place at the table. Thirdly,
national Governments bear the primary responsibility
for women's safety and rights. The international
community should support countries concerned in
their efforts to safeguard women's rights and provide
assistance in that regard. Strengthening the capacity
of national institutions is critical to that endeavour
and UN-Women can play a major role. Fourthly,
gender perspectives should be fully integrated into the
peacebuilding paradigm to reinforce the protection
environment. That would entail not only the greater
participation of women in peacekeeping mandates, but
also an enhanced role of women in peace accords and
in the stabilization and reconstruction phases of post-
conflict rehabilitation.

We fully support the Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse.
Pakistan was among the first batch of countries to
sign the Secretary-General's voluntary compact on the

subject. We have also contributed to the Trust Fund for
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.

In conclusion, let me recall that multidimensional
peacekeeping missions with protection mandates
play a key role in combating violence against women
in conflict and post-conflict situations. As a leading
troop-contributing country, Pakistan remains fully
committed to that cause.

