Mr. Sekudo (Nigeria): On behalf of the Nigerian
delegation, I would like to commend the Vietnamese
presidency of the Security Council for initiating this
important meeting on the landmark resolution 1325
(2000), which was adopted unanimously by the
Council nine years ago. Nigeria welcomes the depth of
the analysis made by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2009/465) and the effort to translate
resolution 1325 (2000) into practical reality for women
and girls all over the world. We convey our
appreciation to the Deputy Secretary General for her
statement. We also commend the contributions of
Ms. Rachel N. Mayanja, Ms. Ines Alberdi and
Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi Amin, and we thank them for their
briefings.

As resolution 1325 (2000) affirms, the needs of
women and girls transcend the traditional socio-
economic, political and cultural considerations, but
also include the need to guarantee their security and
access and an enabling environment that ensures their
meaningful participation in society. This meeting thus
affords us the opportunity to assess the actions we have
taken - of the lack of them - in fulfilment of our
collective obligations under resolution 1325 (2000).
Without a doubt, we need new strategies to accelerate
the fulfilment of those obligations.

It is heartening that some Member States have
demonstrated the effectiveness of mainstreaming
gender as a viable strategy for the implementation of
the resolution. This is borne out by the good example
of the Indian Government in deploying an all-female
peacekeeping unit in Liberia, an act that has not only
encouraged Liberian women's participation in their
country's security forces, but has also emboldened
women to report cases of abuse. Another commendable
example is the programme for the treatment and care of
rape victims by the Forum for African Women
Educationalists.

Commendable as those actions are, more needs to
be done to develop national action plans for the
implementation of the resolution by Member States.
Indeed, the Secretary-General's report indicates that
only 16 Member States have developed national action
plans. This is an issue that requires our urgent
attention.

The effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will require an integrated approach. It will
require us to change our mindsets so that women and
girls are no longer depicted as mere victims of war. It
will also require us to acknowledge and highlight the
roles and positive contributions of women and girls to
society. In addition, issues of gender justice,
accountability and rehabilitation must form part of
intervention programmes to assist women and girls.

With regard to the protection of women and girls
from sexual violence, Nigeria reiterates its firm support
for resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) and for a
zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence against
women and girls. It is in this context that we commend
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur in the Sudan for providing police and military

escorts for women and girls to enable them to
undertake their tasks. In addition, we reiterate our
support for conflict-prevention measures to reduce
threats to women and girls.

We urge Member States to respond to the needs
of women and girls guided by the tenets of human
security. As the 2003 final report of the Commission on
Human Security noted, human security means
protecting vital freedoms. It means protecting people
from critical and pervasive threats and situations, and
building on their strengths and aspirations. It also
means creating systems that give people the building
blocks of survival, dignity and livelihood. Indeed,
resolution 1325 (2000) created obligations that we
unanimously accepted nine years ago. We must
therefore join hands to fulfil these obligations. My
Government stands ready to work with the Council and
other Member States in the discharge of these
commitments.

