Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Let me begin by extending
my congratulations to you, Sir, and to your delegation
on your assumption of the presidency for the month of
October and assuring you of the full cooperation and
support of my delegation. At the same time, I extend
our thanks to the delegation of the United States for
their able leadership during the very difficult month of
September. I express our appreciation to you, Sir, and
to the Vietnamese presidency for initiating this meeting
and for your leadership role in the adoption of today's
resolution 1889 (2009). I also welcome your personal
contribution, Sir, reflected in your presence and your
chairing of the meeting today.

Our thanks also go to the Deputy Secretary-
General, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and the representative of
the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their presence, their contribution and their
dedicated work.

Croatia welcomes the focus on the need of
women and girls in post-conflict situations for
sustainable peace and security. Croatia also welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) (S/2009/456)
and its recommendations.

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union. Here, I shall make
additional remarks in my national capacity.

Almost a decade has passed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). We have witnessed much
progress in the area of the empowerment of women.
Women have been trained in leadership, and there has
been an increase in the number of female peacekeeping
personnel. The Security Council has, for its part,
contributed to significant advancements on the issues
of women and children that are on its agenda. It has
adopted resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) on
sexual violence in armed conflict, under the umbrella
issue of women and peace and security, as well as
resolution 1882 (2009) that addresses, among other
matters, the problem of sexual violence against girls.

These commitments are commendable, but we are
of the belief that putting words into action is the only
way that we can approach the resolution of remaining
issues. And those issues are many. As many situations
on the agenda of the Security Council have shown,
women still have a long way to go in order to fulfil the
empowerment goals as well as to fully realize their
human rights, not only in armed conflict but in times of
peace as well. Women still do not enjoy equal
participation or full involvement in mediation and
negotiation processes. Nor have they participated
equally in post-conflict reconstruction processes.
Notwithstanding these shortfalls, what concerns us
most is the telling failure that women and girls are still
not guaranteed safety even in camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons.

As reported by UNIFEM, there is a substantial
gap in financing women's needs in post-conflict
situations. How did that happen? The answer is clear:
women have not been included from the very
beginning of peace processes, especially in peace

negotiations. It is essential that we reach the goal of
having at least 30 per cent of the members of the
official negotiating delegations whom we appoint be
women, so that the needs of women in post-conflict
peacebuilding are recognized and are addressed from
the very beginning.

Croatia has included elements of resolution 1325
(2000) in its national strategy on gender equality, but
we are aware that gaps in the implementation of that
resolution need to be continuously monitored. In that
regard, my Government extends its support to the
leadership of the composite gender entity that is to be
established within the United Nations. We see it as an
important tool in advancing the issue of women and
peace and security.

Allow me also to use this opportunity to extend
my appreciation to the women of the region of South-
East Europe, who have experienced the burden of the
destruction and violence of armed conflict but have
found ways to reach across borders to connect with
each other and to serve as peacebuilders in the region.
The Council may rest assured that Croatia, under the
leadership of its first female Prime Minister, will
continue to give its full support to all areas of the
women and peace and security agenda.

