Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to convey my delegation's sincere congratulations
for the convening of this important debate on women,
peace and security, which represents, Madam
President, the crowning moment of your remarkable
presidency of the Council for the month of October. I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement, as well as Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe,
President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director of
UN-Women, and Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat,
representative of civil society, for their important
contributions.

My delegation has a special interest in the topic,
because resolution 1325 (2000) represented an
enormous step forward in the protection of women and
highlighted the importance of their role in all aspects
of United Nations peacekeeping. Nonetheless, while it
has remained far from being a cure-all, resolution 1325
(2000) has contributed, along with resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), to improving the
normative framework for preventing gender-based
violence and for protecting women against that
scourge.

It should, however, be pointed out that, despite
those praiseworthy efforts, persistent shortcomings
have exposed thousands of women and girls to various
types of barbaric abuse and atrocities. In fact, rape
continues to be used as a weapon of war in certain
conflict areas, and the ongoing existence of sexual and
gender-based violence, even at the end of a conflict,
represents an almost permanent threat to the security
and health of that vulnerable group of the population.
That is why the international community must firmly
commit to vigorously combating impunity in order to
guarantee the effective prevention of all forms of
violence against women.

While welcoming the zero tolerance policy on
sexual violence of the Secretary-General, we must, in
addition, insist on the need to bolster the role of
women in conflict-prevention and resolution.
Nevertheless, the poor results in that area have
undoubtedly been due to the continuing low
participation of women in the drafting of
implementation strategies. I consider it crucial,
therefore, to foster women's participation by reserving
a key role for them in conflict-prevention policies, as
well as policies on peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
social and economic recovery. In that context, there
must be a special focus on women's empowerment,
which will require significant investment in education,
training and maternal health.

In View of our considerable awareness of that
dynamic process, my country has allocated a
significant part of its budget to education and health,
and on 14 May 2010, it adopted a law to establish full
parity in all partially or fully elected bodies. In that
manner, Senegal intends to ensure the effective
participation of women in decision-making processes.
To follow up on that law, a national gender-parity
monitoring body was set up and will be officially
inaugurated on 16 November.

Senegal has already adopted its national action
plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
Furthermore, it has sought to make a positive
contribution to drafting the action plan of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Dakar Declaration by focusing on
the four following areas: first, effective participation of
women in the peace process; secondly, protection of
women and girls; thirdly, prevention of gender-based
violence through preventive diplomacy and early
warning systems, and fourthly, reconstruction and
victim assistance.
It is certain that those significant national and
regional level initiatives are welcome. However, they
will achieve the desired success only if linked with an
international dynamic inspired by the Security Council
and based on coordinated efforts on the part of
UN-Women and all of the other relevant bodies. There
is also a need to improve women's involvement in
peacekeeping operations by following up on the
laudable efforts already carried out in that domain.

The effective prevention of sexual violence also
requires stringent measures to vigorously combat the
root causes of conflict exacerbation. Since there is an
established link between what is known as low-level
conflicts and wide-scale violence against women, I
would like to launch an appeal for coordinated and
focused action against the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. In that regard, my delegation
cherishes the hope that the diplomatic conference of
2012 will enable the adoption of a robust arms trade
treaty.

Allow me to conclude by expressing my
country's conviction that the efforts to be undertaken
by 2015 will enable the Security Council to take stock
at that time of the positive implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

