Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes Argentina's initiative in
convening today's open debate. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. I would also like
to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, and Assistant Secretary-
General Mulet for their briefings. China also listened
carefully to the statements by the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons,
and the representatives of civil society.

Next year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. Thanks to the joint efforts of
United Nations Member States, agencies and regional
and subregional organizations, positive progress has
been made in its implementation. The international
community has achieved significant results in its
efforts to provide comprehensive protection for the
security, rights and interests of women, and to enhance
the unique role that women play in the area of peace
and security.

Meanwhile, the current international situation
is becoming increasingly complex and challenging,
as various regional conflicts have arisen one after
the other. In many areas, civilians, and women in
particular, are being displaced by war and conflict.
They have to deal with various kinds of Violence and
violations by themselves, without any assistance, and
therefore urgently need the international community's
support. We must therefore work together and in close
coordination in order to strengthen the comprehensive
protection of women in conflict.

In that regard, I would like to emphasize the
following three points. First, the protection of women
in conflict should be addressed so as to deal both with
its symptoms and its underlying causes, and it calls for a
holistic approach. The international community should
take effective measures to provide a comprehensive
guarantee of security to women and ensure that they
receive humanitarian relief. At the same time, we
should also vigorously enhance the political process,
promote national reconciliation and settle differences
through dialogue and consultation, aimed at creating
a safe and stable external environment conducive to
protecting women's rights and interests. At every stage
of the peace process, women's full right to participation
and decision-making should be ensured so that a system
of guarantees can be established to protect their rights
and interests.

Secondly, the United Nations agencies should
strengthen their coordination and cooperation in
support of national efforts to protect women in conflict.
The countries involved bear the primary responsibility
for protecting women in conflict, and the international
community should fully respect that leading role, while
providing constructive support based on the needs of
the countries concerned. The Security Council should
coordinate more closely with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council and UN-Women, based on their respective
mandates, so that they can carry out their various
functions synergistically. Regional and subregional
organizations should also play a full role.

Thirdly, comprehensive economic and social
development and the eradication of the root causes of
conflicts are prerequisites for guaranteeing the rights
and interests of women. They can also advance women's
empowerment and improve their positive contribution
to international peace and security, in order to help the
countries concerned get to work as soon as possible on
post-conflict reconstruction and the development of
women. The international community should increase
its development assistance and technical support to
developing countries, with priority being given to the
countries concerned in the area of national capacity-
building, as well as to ensuring an adequate focus on
the complementary role played by women's groups and
civil society as a whole.

The international community is currently
experiencing a new resurgence of terrorism in some
countries and regions; terrorism and extremism are
becoming rampant and causing enormous harm to
civilians in general and women in particular. This is
now one of the major causes of the displacement of
women, and the international community should ensure
that it pays adequate attention to the issue and makes
resolution 1325 (2000) an integral part ofits response to
terrorism, taking effective measures to protect women
from the effects of terrorism and extremism, and to
ensure women's participation in international efforts to
counter terrorism.

Next year the United Nations will conduct a
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), studying the lessons learned
based on Member States' experience and practices,
and will explore effective ways to protect the rights,
interests and security of women in conflict. China
welcomes the Secretary-General's efforts to initiate that
global study and will actively support and participate in
the relevant activities. We will join with all Member
States in helping to advance United Nations activities
in the area of women and peace and security to a higher
level.

