Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): My delegation is very pleased to see
presiding over the Security Council the leading
diplomat of a friendly country, Namibia, with which
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has excellent,
long-standing relations marked by mutual confidence
and esteem.

I congratulate you, Mr. President, on having
devoted today's meeting of the Council to the issue of
women and peace and security. I also sincerely thank
the Secretary-General, the Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and the Advancement of Women and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) for their significant
contributions this morning to the discussion, which is
part of the momentum generated by the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly, "Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century".

That special session was a unique opportunity to
marshal the efforts to reaffirm and ensure
implementation of the commitments made at the Fourth
World Conference on Women, held in Beijing in 1995.
These commitments were strengthened by the adoption
of the Political Declaration and new measures and
initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, through which the General
Assembly, as part of its effort to achieve a more just
society, stressed in particular that peace is indissolubly
linked to equality between women and men, as well as
to development.

My delegation is pleased that during the
celebration of International Women's Day, the Security
Council, in its presidential statement of 8 March 2000,
stressed the complex links between peace, gender
equality and the need for women to participate fully in
all efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts. This
recognition of women as an equal partner in the
prevention of war could be considered a very
significant step. However, a great deal remains to be
done to recognize fully the role of women in
peacekeeping and peace-building.

My delegation supports the Windhoek
Declaration and the Namibia Plan of Action, adopted
last May, because they are valuable documents that
should be applied, particularly in the implementation of
the Brahimi report, in order to enhance effectiveness.

It is absolutely essential that initiatives aimed at
resolving conflicts and consolidating peace take into
consideration women's concerns, experience and
perspective. My delegation dares to hope that the
organs of the United Nations will be able to incorporate
these concerns and work to promote increased
awareness of the capacities of women, in particular
those affected by armed conflicts, as well as their
ability to contribute to the promotion of a gender
perspective in all peace-building activities. Women
must be involved in the conflict-prevention and
conflict-resolution mechanisms so that they can give
humankind the benefit of their ability to build
consensus, resolve conflicts and build peace. There can
be neither equality nor development without peace and
justice.

Here I should remind the international
community, through the Security Council, the principal
United Nations body charged with the maintenance of
international peace and security, that my country is the
target of aggression by a coalition of armed forces from
Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, in flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations. This conflict, with
its attendant violence, continues to create enormous
movements of internally displaced persons and
refugees, the vast majority of whom are women and
children. One result of these exoduses is to increase
considerably the poverty of the civilian population.
Women and children are the main victims of this
senseless, unjust war, which has done such harm to all
aspects of life in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The education sector has been particularly
affected. The war has prevented many Congolese from
pursuing a normal education programme. However, it
has been proved that for a developing country such as
ours schooling allows women to preserve their health
and that of their families, plan their pregnancies and
participate in the political, social and economic life of
their country. Therefore, to deprive women of
education is to do a kind of violence to them.

Women and children have also been the object of
attacks on the civilian population by the regular armies
of Uganda and Rwanda during their three ruthless
actions against Kisangani to expropriate the
underground wealth of this region - not only gold and
diamonds, but above all niobium. Though extremely
rare in the earth as a whole, this metal is found in
relatively large quantities in the eastern province. It is
used in some alloys to strengthen armour plating and
spacecraft.

This war has destroyed all the country's efforts to
rebuild and revive its economy, efforts that could in
particular lift women and the whole Congolese
population out of the indescribable poverty in which
they now find themselves. Today close to 80 per cent
of the Congolese population is living in absolute
poverty.

Worse than the poverty is the inhuman and
degrading ill-treatment of Congolese women by armed
elements of the aggressor countries, which have made
such ill-treatment a means of waging war. Women have
been massacred, as they were last year, during the week
of 15-22 November 1999, in Mwenga, where the
Arme'e patriotiqne rwandaise, assisted by armed
elements of the Rassemblement congolais pour la
de'mocratie, buried women alive, as ordered by their
commander, Kasereka. Those women's crime: trying to
resist the mass rape that the aggressors were getting
ready to commit. Their punishment: they were bled
white, their bodies coated with pepper, which was then
inserted into all their bodily orifices - their eyes, their
mouths, their noses, their ears and their genitals-
before being thrown into a common grave.

In addition to the incident in Mwenga, many
cases of violations of women's rights have been
recorded and denounced in white papers issued by my
Government and in various reports of the Special
Rapporteur on human rights in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Garreton, the most recent
of which revealed many cases of imprisonment of
militant feminists, of the rape and beating of high
school students for requesting the validation of their
exams, and of rape of women prisoners.

The criminal, barbaric and inhumane practice of
mass rape is also responsible for the spread of
HIV/AIDS. This scourge has ceased to be simply a
health problem in my country. With its tragic
consequences, it now has a worrying effect on
development. AIDS is a significant obstacle to progress
and national development.

It was estimated at the end of 1999 that 1,100,000
adults and children in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo had been infected with this fatal virus. Children
orphaned by the disease are estimated to number
800,000, of whom 450,000 are still alive. In the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo - the
part occupied by Ugandan troops - in the space of two
years the prevalence of AIDS has increased from 4.5
per cent, the national average, to 22 per cent. In other
words, it has increased by five times. The catastrophe
looming on the horizon is attributed to sexual contacts
with Rwandan and Ugandan soldiers, who come from
countries where the disease is widespread.

Besides AIDS, it is worth noting here the
resurgence of diseases such as malaria, now
responsible for 500,000 deaths a year, many of which
are of children under five years of age. The national
maternal mortality rate is 1,837 deaths per 100,000
births, compared with 3,000 in the occupied provinces,
which is one of the highest rates in the world.

On 9 June the American non-governmental
organization, the International Rescue Committee
(IRC), announced that at least 1,700,000 people, out of
a population of 20 million, in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo had died since 1
January 1999 as a result of combat and the breakdown
of infrastructures. In the village of Moba, Katanga,
alone, 47 per cent of infants under one year of age have
died since 2 August 1998. Throughout this area, to
escape the Violence, people are fleeing into the forest,
where, completely neglected, they are dying of malaria.

It would be useful for the international
community to get accurate figures of the number of
people who have died, directly and indirectly, in the
fighting throughout our national territory, and to study
the impact of these deaths on the Congolese family.
Congolese women have lost their lives, husbands, sons,
daughters, brothers and fathers in this absurd war,
which for three years now has allowed Rwanda,
Burundi and Uganda to outrage the entire world with
impunity.
It is obvious that Congolese women are directly
involved in the promotion of peace in their country.
Their search for a liberating peace should be supported
by all the members of the Security Council, because
the restoration of peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will help Congolese women to pursue their
struggle against poverty and all forms of Violence
against them. The Council must assist them in
achieving this goal by denouncing the war of
aggression and discouraging all those countries
involved in the war against my country, which
dehumanizes Congolese women.

Given that the Council has asked my Government
and the other parties to demonstrate their commitment
to peace in the weeks to come, it has no right to
withdraw from the peace process; rather, it should
mobilize as it did so well in Kosovo, in East Timor
and, more recently, in the crisis in the Middle East. My
delegation can in no way believe that, on 15 December,
the international community will decide to withdraw
from the search for peace in my country because
powerful and differing interests do not wish it to be
restored there. If it were to do so, the international
community would be abandoning millions of
Congolese citizens, men and women, to their sad fate
and to the schemes of those who were so recently
lauded as a new breed of leader in Africa. Abandoning
us would mean not helping people at risk. It is
inconceivable and unimaginable that the Governments
of people who claim to be steeped in humanism and to
respect human rights could even consider taking such
an attitude.

In conclusion, let me reiterate what my delegation
has continuously stated to a world dedicated to peace
and justice. My delegation wants the entire world to
understand that the men, women and children of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are tired of a war of
aggression that is futile and stupid. My people want
and seek peace. They want to live in a Democratic
Republic of the Congo that is strong and united,
enjoying full sovereignty and territorial integrity. They
want to live in understanding with the peoples of the
nine States bordering my country.

My Government is open to any proposal or
initiative aimed at putting a speedy end to the barbaric
bloodshed that has engulfed the entire Great Lakes
region. Whether it comes via the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, as amended by resolution 1304 (2000), in
which the Security Council demanded that Uganda and
Rwanda, which have violated the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, withdraw all their forces from the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo without further
delay; Via direct negotiations between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and aggressor countries; or via
direct negotiations between the Government and our
Congolese brothers who have chosen to resolve their
differences by violence, the main thing is that we
should be able to work together to achieve a lasting
peace for the entire region. Such a peace could be
guaranteed by the international community through an
international conference to address the thorny problems
of law and order in the region and to consider what is
needed to achieve peace and sustainable development
throughout the region, so that the underlying and
immediate causes of the disaster overwhelming our
subcontinent can be eliminated once and for all.

Given their rich social, cultural and ethnic
diversity, the peoples of our subregion deserve such a
peace. They are entitled to peace, without which any
hope for human dignity, for the advancement of
women, for wellbeing and for development would be
futile and compromised.

