Mr. Lucas (Angola): Today, the Security Council
is meeting four years after the adoption of its important
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. It is an occasion on which to assess the
progress achieved and the gaps and challenges
remaining in the implementation of the resolution. The
presence of distinguished personalities at the meeting
attests to the importance of this debate and of the
subject matter we are addressing.

Resolution 1325 (2000) deals with fundamental
issues relating to the Security Council's mandate and
the wider concerns of the international community. The
main thrust of the resolution regards the participation
and involvement of women in our collective efforts for
the maintenance and promotion of peace and security,
the protection of women and girls from human rights
abuses - which constitute the most abhorrent and
condemnable aspect of present-day conflict - and the
mainstreaming of gender perspectives in issues directly
related to conflict and post-conflict situations.

Those are the main subjects dealt with by
resolution 1325 (2000), which the Security Council,
the United Nations system, States, civil society and
other actors must address in order to advance the
fundamental role that women can and should play in
ensuring a more peaceful, just and equitable world.

The Security Council's adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) reflected a three-fold reality. First, it
recognized women's potential in contributing to the
prevention of conflict. In their communities, women
are the most reliable source of information about
mounting tensions and signs of instability, not to
mention signs of gender violence, and if their views are
taken into account, they can play a decisive role in
providing early warning of conflict.

In the report before us (S/2004/814), the
Secretary-General acknowledges the unique role
played by indigenous women in conflict resolution as
mediators and peace-builders and, in that context,
expresses his intention to develop a strategy and an
action plan to increase the attention focused on gender
perspectives in conflict prevention and to ensure that
women's contributions, needs and priorities are
included in conflict-prevention strategies and early-
warning efforts.

The second reality is that women and girls are the
most conspicuous victims of violence in situations of
armed conflict, as a result of non-compliance by parties
to conflict with international humanitarian, human
rights, refugee and criminal law. Indeed, there has been
international recognition of the seriousness of gender-
based violence and a growing international
commitment to ensure accountability. Key challenges
confronting States and the international community
include the need to apply increased pressure on parties
to armed conflict to cease such violence, to bring to
justice the perpetrators of such crimes against women,
to ensure the effective prosecution of gender-based
violence and to end impunity.

The third reality is the need to mainstream gender
perspectives in relation to issues directly related to
conflict and post-conflict situations. The adoption of
the resolution provided an impetus to include gender
concerns as a regular part of peacekeeping mission
mandates, and gender advisers have been included in
every multidimensional peacekeeping operation. The
development of a comprehensive strategy and action
plan for mainstreaming gender perspectives into
peacekeeping operations, in particular in the planning
of new operations, as stated in the Secretary-General's
report, would translate into reality this important
policy principle, embodied in resolution 1325 (2000).

We still have a long way to go towards fully
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), and the
remaining challenges must be addressed by all
stakeholders. Member States, the Security Council, the
United Nations system and civil society organizations
must pool their efforts, enhance coordination and adopt
creative approaches to advocacy, education and
mobilization in all areas relating to the resolution. Civil
society and its organizations are already playing an
important role in this respect, and that potential should
be further enhanced. The role of women's networks in
improving conditions for women is well known; if
properly supported, they can play an increasingly
important role in conflict prevention and peace-
building and in ensuring access to justice for all
women.

Monitoring and reporting on implementation are
crucial issues in making resolution 1325 (2000) fully
operational. The recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report give particular emphasis to
that issue by establishing provisions for monitoring and
reporting on all areas related to the resolution. The
Secretary-General expresses his intention to routinely
incorporate gender perspectives in all thematic and
country reports to the Security Council and to continue
to closely monitor the progress made.

Taking account of proposals made during the
open debate last year (see S/PV.4852), we are of the
view that the Security Council should consider
establishing a mechanism to monitor the progress
accomplished on this very important issue.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
country's commitment to the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In July this year, an Angolan
delegation met with experts from the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women to
discuss Angola's first report to the Committee. The
Angolan Vice-Minister for Family and the Promotion
of Women, in a statement to the Commission on the
Status of Women at its forty-eighth session, declared:

"Despite the recognition given to Angolan
women for their efforts and their involvement in
peace promotion, they seldom have an equal
participation in decisions that lead to peace. Nor
do they participate in conflict resolution. Even so,
women are often the first to reach across ethnic
and religious divides in order to rebuild
communities and families torn apart due to
violence."

Nonetheless, Angolan women are making great strides.
They are showing remarkable will and determination to
overcome their present situation, and we are convinced
that they will be successful in a relatively short period
of time.

The Declaration of heads of State or Government
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) committed SADC member States to ensuring
equal representation of women and men in the process
of decision-making at all levels and in SADC's
structures, and to attain, by 2005, 30 per cent
representation by women in political structures and
decision-making bodies. It is our hope that that
Declaration will be translated into reality and will
provide a decisive boost for women's emancipation in
Southern Africa, and in Angola in particular.

With the electoral process due to take place in
2006, Angolan women will have a unique opportunity
to claim their fair share in the decision-making
structures of the country - an endeavour to which we
believe they are equal.

Finally, we are pleased to express our full support
for the presidential statement that the President of the
Security Council will deliver later on behalf of the
Council, which contains important proposals for the
further implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

