Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
wishes to express its appreciation to the Secretary-
General, Special Representative Bangura and
Ms. Misaka for their statements. We also thank the
delegation of Nigeria for convening this debate today.
It is important that the Council continues to state, in
the clearest possible terms, that conflict-related sexual
violence will not be tolerated and that it makes all
efforts to give those words effect.

We have seen some significant steps forward since
the Council last convened an open debate to consider
this issue in 2013 (see S/PV.7044), including the
adoption of resolution 2106 (2013). Over the past year,
we have also welcomed specific commitments made
by a number of countries to combat sexual violence in
armed conflict.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2014/l81) on
conflict-related sexual violence is sobering; it illustrates
the scale and severity of the challenges that remain. It
is clear that political commitments need to translate
into concrete actions on the ground. The international
community must address the use of sexual violence to
intimidate and maintain social control, reprisals against
those who report crimes, the targeting of children and
the lack of access to justice, as well as many other
difficult challenges.

In the face of those challenges, what can be done?
First and foremost, national Governments themselves
must show leadership. As an international community,
we must support efforts by national Governments and
by other actors, including civil society. The Security
Council must also continue to focus on the issue.

If lasting progress is to be made, then we must
focus on preventing conflict-related sexual violence
from occurring in the first place by dealing with root
causes. That requires national Governments, supported
by the United Nations, to emphasize better education at
all levels within communities - from schools to health
centres to the military - in order to help shift social
attitudes and improve understanding of sexual violence.

The Security Council must ensure that there is
an ongoing systematic focus on prevention, including
in all the relevant country-specific resolutions, in
peacekeeping mandate authorizations and renewals,
and in special political missions. Ensuring strong
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements will
help to identify situations of risk early so that they can
be addressed. That will also require coordination and
information-sharing across United Nations activities.
We strongly encourage the ongoing training of
United Nations peacekeepers to protect populations
from sexual violence. Peacekeepers can provide a
strong line of prevention and response, both in terms
of recognizing early warning signs and reporting them,
as well as addressing appropriately instances where
sexual violence has occurred. Good quality training
that is comprehensive and contextual should ensure
that peacekeepers are able to recognize and respond
to those most vulnerable to sexual violence. That
includes, for example, persons with disabilities who
have a heightened risk of sexual violence but often face
challenges to both prevent and report sexual violence.

Women's protection advisers play a critical role in
prevention and response, and New Zealand calls for
more advisers to be deployed to the relevant missions.
Consideration should also be given to ensuring adequate
deployment of child protection advisers, reflecting the
fact that young people are often victims.

Effective accountability is vital to hold perpetrators
to account, to ensure recognition for victims and to deter
future crimes. We acknowledge the important work
done by international tribunals and the International
Criminal Court in strengthening international law on
sexual violence. The focus the Council has paid to
accountability in resolution 2106 (2013) was welcome,
and we must continue that trend by ensuring that
accountability and access to justice are part of all our
conversations about conflict-related sexual violence.

At the national level, effective accountability
requires strong domestic laws, institutions and practical
mechanisms that actually enable access to justice.
We applaud the engagement so far of United Nations
actors, in particular the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, to support
national authorities to achieve accountability. New
Zealand encourages the continuation and deepening of
that support.

New Zealand is one of the 144 countries that
endorsed the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict, an initiative of the United
Kingdom. The Declaration demonstrated that the
political will exists to tackle conflict-related sexual
violence. The upcoming Global Summit to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict, to be held in London in June,
provides an important opportunity to grow the political
will and identify practical actions while reflecting on
some of the concerns raised in the Council today.

New Zealand strongly endorses the Secretary-
General's and others' call for all parties to conflict
responsible for acts of sexual violence to cease
that horrendous conduct and to make protection
commitments. We also call for the further strengthening
and implementation of the protection framework while
ensuring that protection is extended to those most
vulnerable to conflict-related sexual violence.

