Mr. Gone (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. As we did in the case of your
previous mandate, we express our full confidence that
you, Sir, will steer the work of the Council effectively.

My country is very pleased to take part in this open
debate on conflict-related sexual violence. It is high time
for us to exchange views again on this important issue.
My delegation takes note of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/249). I also thank the briefers for their
outstanding presentations this morning.

The Secretary-General's report indicates that
conflict-related sexual violence continued in 2016, as
in the past. Often such violence was strategic in nature
with specific objectives and chosen targets. Worse still,
new phenomena, such as the rise of violent extremism,
have further complicated the picture which was
already alarming. This violence, which has disastrous
consequences for the victims, their families and
communities, is unacceptable. It is a serious violation
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
The international community, and in particular the
Security Council as the guarantor of world peace and
security, must vigorously combat this type of violence
and ensure that perpetrators are brought before the
competent courts to answer for their actions. In that
regard, my country particularly welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2331 (2016) and fully endorses the zero-
tolerance policy of the Secretary-General on the sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by Blue Helmets, and
the specific measures taken in those cases.

My country has emerged from almost a decade
of crisis. Unfortunately, during that time there were
reported cases of sexual violence, mostly individual
and collective rape. Those cases are indeed touched
upon in the report in question. However, the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire, in its determination to
tackle this phenomenon, has, in addition to existing
legal mechanisms, implemented a national strategy to
combat gender-based violence. Thus, of 478 cases of
sexual violence documented and perpetrated by the
Armed Forces of Cote d'Ivoire and non-State actors in
2011 in the wake of the post-electoral crisis, we have
moved to just one case of attempted rape in 2016. The
perpetrator was brought before the Military Court.

Given the praiseworthy progress made, the
Secretary-General has just removed Cote d'Ivoire from
the list of countries where law-enforcement agencies
and armed groups have systematically committed rape
and other forms of sexual violence in armed conflict.
The Government of Cote d'Ivoire would like to express
its full appreciation to the United Nations for that
decision, and at the same time we would like to call for
the removal ofthe non- State actors from the list, as those
groups, while still included in the Secretary-General's
report, have not been in existence for six years. That
result is the outcome of the successful cooperation
between the Ivorian Government and its security and
defence forces and the United Nations. Here, I would
like to pay tribute to the high quality of the work
carried out by the former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, and her team.

In order to meet the challenges involved the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire undertook actions at
several levels. Regarding the strengthening of the
regulatory framework, the initiatives undertaken since
the 2011 crisis led to the establishment of a National
Committee to Combat Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence and the establishment of a mechanism for the
suppression of rape. Along those lines, the Chief of the
Defence Staff signed a Declaration of Commitment
at the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict in London on 19 June 2014. In June 2015 and
in July 2016 that led to the signing of commitments
by 47 commanders of the armed forces and, later, by
35 commanders of gendarmerie units. That involved
training their personnel on the issue of sexual violence
and combating that scourge.

Currently, instruction on sexual violence in both
peace and conflict forms an integral part of the training
modules for training offices and military academies.
Over the past three years the Government has also
organized numerous workshops for the defence and
security forces so as to ensure that ownership decisions
are taken at the highest levels.

In terms of cooperation with the United Nations,
my Government welcomes the establishment in 2015 of
the Joint Mechanism between the Ivorian Armed Forces
and the Human Rights Division of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire to monitor violations of
human rights. We would like to express our total
appreciation of the important role played by the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. The team assisted my country with technical
assistance in developing and implementing an action
plan for the Armed Forces ofCote d'Ivoire. In particular,
that involved setting up special police units and
strengthening training for the national gendarmerie.

As a troop-contributing country, Cote d'Ivoire
intends to continue along the same lines, building the
capacity for its defence and security forces to combat
sexual violence. My country is also determined to
successfully conclude the legal proceedings regarding
recorded cases and to support victims, in particular
through actions taken by the Ministry of Women, Child
Protection and Solidarity.

In conclusion, I should like to point out that my
delegation e most of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on conflict-
related sexual violence. Nonetheless, it would like to
emphasize the following points.

First, Member States must bring their national
legislation in line with international standards with
respect to the qualification, prevention and punishment
of sexual violence. Secondly, it is important to integrate
theissue ofsexualviolenceintopeacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, priority must be given to capacity-building in
areas related to sexual violence before contingents are
deployed. Fourthly, human rights, international criminal
law and international humanitarian law must be taught
during the initial training of national security and
defence forces. Fifthly, human rights concepts must be
included in secondary school curricula and professional
training courses. Finally, my delegation would like to
highlight the relevance of the ever-increasing number
of female personnel in national defence and security
systems and peacekeeping contingents.

