Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): My delegation
welcomes this opportunity to participate in this open
debate on women and peace and security, and wishes to
express our appreciation to the delegation of the
People's Republic of China for convening it. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2008/622)
on women and peace and security, which offers an
assessment of the state of implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the challenges that remain.

I also would like to thank the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General, Ms. Rachel Mayanja; Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain Le Roy; the Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM),
Ms. Ines Alberdi; and Ms. Sarah Taylor, Coordinator of
the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security, for their fruitful and comprehensive
interventions on the present situation of women
regarding peace and security.

The genocide in Rwanda in 1994 witnessed some
of the most inhumane acts of violence targeted at
women and girls and the use of sexual violence as a
tactic of genocide. The survivors of the genocide
continue to live with the consequences of those crimes
almost 15 years later. The perpetrators of these heinous
crimes, the ex-forces armees rwandaises and
interahamwe, now the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), have been a main cause
of regional insecurity in the Great Lakes region since
1994 and continue to be a major factor in the current
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The FDLR continues to commit war crimes,
crimes against humanity and numerous other human
rights violations in the Great Lakes region.

Many regional and international agreements and
instruments provide commendable mechanisms to deal
with the threat posed by FDLR, but little or no attempt
has been made to translate them into action. It is
imperative that those agreements be put into action
promptly to enable a lasting solution to the problem,
which further threatens women in the Great Lakes
region.

The equal participation of women in the
promotion of peace and security in both conflict and
post-conflict situations is integral to any peacekeeping,
peacemaking or peacebuilding process. It is in that
context that my Government has set out to ensure that
women are central to the political, economic and social
governance of our nation. Women today hold 56 per
cent of seats in Parliament; head the Foreign,
Information and Education Ministries, among others;
head the police force and participate in peacekeeping
missions; and hold command positions in the armed
forces.

The participation of women in the maintenance
and promotion of peace can begin to manifest itself
only through sheer political will. The Government of
Rwanda has made it abundantly clear that governance
without the participation of more than of half the
population is not governance.

Rwanda is a major troop-contributing country to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and has a
vested interest in preventing sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict. Therefore, the Rwanda
Defence Forces (RDF) considers gender-based
violence and violence against women to be main
components of the security threat. In that respect, the
gender desk at Rwanda Defence Headquarters devises
training programmes with the support of UNIFEM. to
raise awareness of gender-based violence and violence
against women in the armed forces.

Awareness of and training in how to respond to
gender-based violence and violence against women has
now been mainstreamed into the curriculum of all of
Rwanda's military schools and training institutions and
is integral to the preparation of all RDF battalions
preparing for peacekeeping missions abroad. The
participation of Rwandan policewomen in
peacekeeping missions in the Sudan has further
ensured that they raise awareness among the
population in support of their missions.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
calling for an increase in resources and support to
Governments in conflict or post-conflict situations to
ensure the increased participation of women in the
maintenance and promotion of peace. We also look
forward to the establishment of a strengthened and
consolidated United Nations gender entity.

My Government therefore reiterates its support
for the continued implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and the
Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples'
Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa and will
remain a strong advocate for the participation of
women in all aspects of governance.

