Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia very much
values this opportunity to reaffirm its commitment to
tackling sexual violence in conflict. As a sponsor of
resolution 1820 (2008), we very strongly support the
Council's focus on this compelling challenge.

Australia recognizes the important links between
sexual violence, social violence and the role of
peacebuilding activities in preventing violence. We
have been a strong supporter of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security since its adoption
nine years ago. That resolution, of course, provided the
basis for women to play a greater role in all peace
processes and peacebuilding activities, and urged all of
us to undertake proactive strategies to promote,
cultivate, develop, encourage and sustain individuals,
communities and nations to integrally practice peace.
Resolution 1820 (2008), of course, grew out of the
decisive resolution 1325 (2000), and we would urge all
nations to undertake all actions to implement it and to
ensure that it is carried out within that broader context.

Specifically in regard to the Secretary-General's
report, we welcome his recommendations on
operationalizing resolution 1820 (2008) within the
United Nations in a systematic, structural and lasting
way, including by ensuring appropriate references in
mandate creation and renewal processes. Utilizing
effectively this Council's most recent aide memoire on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which
includes provisions on sexual violence, will also be
crucial.

Now is the time to get things done. One good
example of practical United Nations action is in Timor-
Leste, where the National Vulnerable Persons Unit of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
is successfully training local police on gender-based
violence and policing responsibilities.

We welcome the Secretary-General's advice that
he is considering the appointment of a senior person to
address the prevention of and response to sexual
violence across the United Nations system. We would
support such an appointment. Australia considers an
appointment with an operational mandate to be an
appropriate way to build on the current work of the
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict.

We note the Secretary-General's recommendation
that a commission of inquiry on sexual violence in
Chad, the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo be established. Any such process must result in
tangible outcomes. Impunity for sexual violence cannot
be tolerated. We think that the Council must be
prepared to act on any evidence collected by such a
process to ensure accountability.

We are concerned ~ not exclusively, but
particularly - about the high level of reported sexual
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
are also concerned about the reported discrimination
against the minority Muslim population in Myanmar
and its vulnerability to sexual violence, as well as the
high level of sexual violence perpetrated by the armed
forces against rural women from other ethnic groups.
We call on Myanmar to ensure that its agents cease
perpetrating sexual violence against civilians.

Australia itself is actively pursuing a range of
practical initiatives to combat the prevalence of sexual
violence in conflict. We are pleased to support the
efforts of United Nations action on its Analytical
Inventory of Responses by Peacekeeping Personnel to
War-Related Violence against Women, which will be
launched this year. That very practical tool will provide
valuable guidance to peacekeeping personnel on the
ground. We are pleased to support the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the United Nations
Development Programme in their initiative in
conducting a joint research project to provide guidance
on how this Council's resolutions on women and peace
and security can be implemented to reduce the high
levels of sexual violence throughout the Pacific. That

includes in Solomon Islands, where Australia, with
many others, is involved with partners in a regional
peacekeeping mission. In Solomon Islands, Australian
federal police officers are working alongside local
police to develop their capacity to respond to sexual
violence.

As the representative of Papua New Guinea has
just observed, the communique issued yesterday in
Cairns, Australia, by the 16 leaders of the Pacific
Islands Forum took an important step towards
addressing sexual and gender-based violence, which is
endemic throughout the Pacific. Leaders acknowledged
the potential destabilizing effects of that significant
issue on communities and societies, undertook to
firmly establish it on domestic political agendas and
committed to its eradication and to ensuring that all
individuals have equal access to justice. Those steps
reaffirm the commitment of all Pacific leaders to
combat sexual and gender-based violence.

There is a range of other activities, of course, that
we and others in our region are involved with, which
we list in our distributed statement.

To conclude, in 2008, this Council, through its
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), finally recognized
that sexual violence was a calculated aspect of
conflicts threatening regional and international peace
and security that had to be addressed, and had to be
addressed very specifically. One year on, the
commitment of all Member States is still required -
very much required - to translate that understanding
into practice. We must all, Australia included, remain
firmly dedicated to that goal.

