Mr. Sen (India): We are pleased to see the United
Kingdom presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council.

In an earlier intervention on women and peace
and security, we advised that the Council, in its
examination of the issue, remain within the area of its
mandate, namely the impact of conflict on women and
the Council's role in its resolution. While we have been
participating in the debates of the Council on this item,
we continue to maintain that thematic issues with a
cross-cutting, multisectoral dimension requiring the
active consideration of all Member States are best
discussed in a universal forum such as the General
Assembly.

The report of the Secretary-General under
consideration (S/2004/814) provides a comprehensive
review of the progress achieved over the past four
years in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The report shows that the initiative has led to some
success in areas such as gender mainstreaming in
peacekeeping operations and training of peacekeepers
on gender perspectives.

My country has been happy to contribute to this
process. As one of the larger troop contributors to the
United Nations, India has been conscious of the need
to incorporate the essential elements of such a policy in
the pre-deployment training that all its peacekeepers
undergo before proceeding to mission areas. In
response to the Secretary-General's concern about the
low representation of women in peacekeeping
operations, expressed in his report on implementation
of the recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (A/58/694), India has
decided to deploy two women military observers to the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Secretary-General has pointed out in the
report that is before the Council today, however, that
the protection and promotion of the human rights of
women and girls in armed conflict continues to pose a
pressing challenge. The real test of the adequacy of
these efforts is undoubtedly their impact on the ground.
The post-cold war era has been characterized by
increasing intra-State conflicts, terrorist attacks, ethnic
cleansing and egregious violations of human rights. All
of these have an impact on the vulnerable sections of
society, mainly women and children. The international
community needs to mobilize itself to address these
situations. We share the principles and objectives of the
report. Our comments, therefore, are on certain matters
of nuance and detail.

In our experience, some of the solutions offered
by the Secretary-General, in particular the greater
participation of women in areas of conflict prevention,
peace negotiations and post-conflict reconstruction, are
germane to the issue. Some solutions would need to
emerge from the conflict-ridden societies themselves.
Others are more long-term and structural. They
involve, inter alia, the encouragement of democratic
ideals and practices, freedom of speech and expression,
effecting improvements in economic and social
conditions and the expansion of opportunities for
education and productive employment.

It was not for nothing that the poet Nekrasov,
writing of the horrors of war, said that the most sacred
tears are those of mothers. Mothers' organizations have
in several cases moderated conflict, and their strength
and energy need to be specifically harnessed. In his
report, the Secretary-General has reflected upon
several salient issues with regard to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). He recognizes the need to
prioritize the proactive role women can play in peace-
building and the need to enhance women's
participation at the peace table. We are in full
agreement with the Secretary-General's observation
that, without the inclusive participation of women,
peace-building cannot be comprehensive.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's
identification of some key challenges in this regard,
including the need to increase the number of women in
high-level decision-making positions in peacekeeping
operations, peace negotiations and similar activities.
Addressing the issue of women's full participation in
peace negotiations and peace-building is undoubtedly
essential. However, attempts to artificially enhance the
number of women in peace negotiations - especially
in conflicts in male-dominated societies - cannot
necessarily guarantee enduring results. Equal
participation has to be a local initiative, and any
external attempt at influencing the situation, though
necessary, has to be incremental for it to have a truly
lasting effect.

We agree with the Secretary-General's view that
it is important for the United Nations and its agencies
to achieve a higher level of representation of women,
quantitatively and at senior levels. It may also be
useful for the Secretary-General to consider making
adequate provision of resources for training women
from developing countries, in order to give this
meaning. While making provision for regular
budgetary resources specifically allocated for both
gender mainstreaming and initiatives targeted at
women and girls, the need for specific resource
allocation for such training should be kept in mind.

Similarly, the question of bringing perpetrators of
violence to justice merits careful consideration. We
agree with the Secretary-General that the international
community should send stronger signals to parties
involved in conflicts that gender-based violence will be
investigated and that perpetrators will be prosecuted.
There should be zero tolerance for gender-based
Violence.

However, external attempts at imposing justice
may sometimes lead to further strife, as we have heard
repeatedly from countries that have emerged from
conflict and are in the process of establishing rule-
based systems. The international community, therefore,
needs to enhance cooperation for capacity-building in
the areas of justice and the rule of law and in
strengthening national justice systems to ensure that
perpetrators of violence are brought to justice.

Like the Secretary-General, we are convinced
that sexual exploitation and sexual abuse are totally
unacceptable forms of behaviour. We condemn such
behaviour, whether by peacekeeping personnel or by
humanitarian personnel, and we believe that necessary
measures providing protection against such
exploitation and abuse must be undertaken. However,
in that respect, sometimes we feel it is not that the
Secretary-General's support goes too far, but rather that
it perhaps does not go far enough, and that even more
stringent regulations, going beyond the Secretary-
General's bulletin, are necessary in dealing with such
cases. In that context, we are cognizant of the fact that
many Member States have regulations more far-
reaching than those contained in the bulletin and that
powerful, committed and results-oriented women's
organizations in many countries have achieved
significant results.
The Secretary-General has urged Member States
and entities of the United Nations to establish a
coordinated humanitarian-response-monitoring system
with specific indicators to determine attention to
gender perspectives at the field level. He has also
expressed his intention to set indicators and
benchmarks for equal participation by women in all
aspects of election processes, based on a review of
good practice. The development of indicators,
benchmarks and guidelines is a sensitive and serious
issue that should involve a process of broader
intergovernmental scrutiny and approval before their
eventual adoption.

