Mrs. Chatardova (Czech Republic): Sixteen years
ago, resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirmed the importance
of the equal participation and full involvement of
women in all efforts to maintain and promote peace and
security. We agree with a statement in the global study
that in an era when armed extremist groups place the
subordination of women at the top of their agenda, our
response should be unwavering support for empowering
girls and women.

The Czech Republic seeks to strengthen the position
of women in society through development cooperation
and humanitarian aid. That goal is enshrined, inter alia,
in our multilateral foreign development cooperation
strategy for the period 2013-2017. In order to fulfil
those priorities, the Czech Republic cooperates with
relevant United Nations agencies, particularly the
United Nations Population Fund, UN-Women, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS. In the field of humanitarian aid, the Czech
Republic pays special attention to victims of gender-
based violence. The gender perspective also continues
to be taken into account a cross-cutting target within
projects in countries like Iraq, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, Syria and Ukraine.

At Jordan's request, the Czech Republic became the
lead nation of a partner cooperation and implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) programme, focused on
training female Jordanian soldiers in explosive ordnance
disposal. Gender mainstreaming is part and parcel of
the cross-cutting principles of the Czech Republic's
transition promotion programme. In 2016, projects
were launched in Serbia, Zimbabwe and Palestine.

We firmly believe that girls and women are not just
survivors and victims of war; they are also leaders and
peace builders. Conflict through a woman's eyes brings
an invaluable perspective, one which has often been
ignored in our history. That is one of the reasons why
the Czech Republic negotiated a resolution on equal
political participation on four occasions in Geneva.

Women, however, are still underrepresented in
decision-making positions in the Czech Republic. That
is why, in July, the Government adopted an action plan
for the balanced representation of women and men in
decision-making positions for the years 2016-2018. In
June 2015, the Czech Ministry of Defence adopted its
own action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
By the end of 2016, the Czech Republic will adopt a
national action plan on women and peace and security
for the years 2017-20.

Let me conclude by quoting the Secretary General:
"Justice for women takes more than new laws and new
funding. Ultimately, we need new mindsets." Having
said that, let me express our readiness to promote and
support the full implementation of the agenda on women
and peace and security domestically as well as abroad.

