Mr. Belfrage (Sweden): I would like to start by
thanking the Republic of Uganda for ensuring that the
10-year anniversary of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) has been given a very prominent part of
this month's Security Council agenda. And I would
also like to align Sweden with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later today.

During the ministerial meeting on Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) - a call to action - a
month ago, Governments from all corners of the world
demonstrated their support and their conviction that
women have a central role to play in achieving durable
peace in conflict regions. So far, some 20 countries
have adopted national action plans on resolution 1325
(2000), and we were happy to note the intention of
many more countries to adopt and implement such
plans. We heard inspiring examples of transnational
cooperation in sharing experience and knowledge with
those whose plans are still in progress. Many of us also
emphasized the importance of including civil society
and women's groups in such processes and other work.

Four years ago, Sweden presented its first
national action plan on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Today we are in the process of
implementing our second national action plan, for the
period 2009-2012. It permeates our security and
development policies and makes resolution 1325 (2000)
a special focus in our contribution to crisis
management, in our humanitarian assistance and in our
development cooperation with countries in conflict and
post-conflict situations. A concrete example is the
upcoming appointment of a special ambassador-at-
large in Sweden for the work of implementing
resolution 1325 (2000).

Other concrete examples from the field include
the Sudan, where Sweden is contributing some
45 million Swedish kronor - around €4.5 million -
via the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) to a variety of organizations promoting
women's role and participation. Sweden also
2

contributes to UNIFEM. in Afghanistan, with some 62
million Swedish kronor - just above €6 million -
including for support for the Afghan national action
plan for women. Additional contributions are directed
to the Swedish Committee for Afghanistan and its
programmes for girls. We have also been active in
strengthening the gender perspective in European
Union (EU) crisis management policy and operations,
for example by sending gender advisers/focal points to
EU missions in Kosovo, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Georgia.

We welcome the Security Council's request to the
Secretary-General to provide a single coherent
framework based on the set of indicators aimed at
tracking the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
It is time, we feel, to make sure that we, the Member
States, can be held accountable for our commitments.

Sweden welcomes the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women), and we congratulate its first Executive
Director, Ms. Michelle Bachelet. Sweden will support
her efforts in a substantial manner, both financially and
politically.

Civil society and the participation of women's
groups play an important role. Women's groups help
empower women so that the voices of women in
conflict areas are heard and can influence the work to
achieve peace. They conduct research on women's role
in conflict, they alert us to tragedies, they report to us
on progress and they provide expertise. Sweden is
grateful for the valuable work of such groups and
acknowledges the need for wider cooperation with civil
society at all levels. We would encourage UN Women
to show the leadership necessary to facilitate the wide
inclusion of women's organizations in the work of the
United Nations in our collective ambition to achieve
durable peace and equitable and sustainable global
development.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2010/498)
shows once again that enhancing women's
participation is an efficient method for achieving
security and development for local communities as a
whole. And, given the importance of having women in
leading positions, we would strongly encourage the
appointment of more women Special Representatives
and deputy heads of mission. We welcome the targeted
efforts to train and deploy more female mediators. We
welcome the efforts of the senior Police Adviser of the
10-60385

Department of Peacekeeping Operations, including her
determination to increase the number of female police
officers in peace keeping operations, since this also
responds to operational needs on the ground. Sweden is
committed to continuing to sustain at least the same
proportion of female police officers in peacekeeping
operations as in its National Police Service.

Finally, I would also like to emphasize the work
being done by Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and her Office. The Special
Representative's work is of outstanding importance,
and the results in the next few years will be an
important indicator of the international community's
ability to address the structural violence that is directed
towards women.

