Ms. Bird (Australia): Conflicts are profoundly
gendered experiences. Australia therefore commends
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union to secure the full and effective
participation of women at all stages of the prevention,
resolution and management of conflicts and post-
conflict reconstruction in Africa.

We also commend the work of the United Nations
Office in West Africa on advancing gender equality.
We welcome its commitment to adopting a new regional
action plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and to establishing an annual dialogue with leaders in
West Africa.

Last year's global study demonstrated the critical
importance of women and women's groups in bringing
peace to their communities. Where women exercise real
influence in the negotiation process, the prospects for
reaching agreement increase; the chances of agreements
being implemented grows; and the likelihood of
agreements failing diminishes.

The high-level review on women and peace and
security also left no doubt: women's meaningful
participation is vital to enhancing conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts. We must
also take heed of the 2015 peacebuilding architecture
review and expand women's political participation
and leadership beyond the peace table. This is a
responsibility shared by us all. We must actively seek
out opportunities for women and women's groups
to participate meaningfully to prevent conflict and
sustain peace.

The participation of women in peace and security
requires a significant cultural change, including across
the United Nations system, to ensure that human
rights and the protection of civilians are considered
to be a system-wide responsibility. We must respond
to possible violations of human rights at the earliest
possible signs. Australia is highly supportive of the
Secretary-General's Human Rights Up Front Initiative
in this regard.

Australia has been active in implementing the
commitments we made at last year's high-level review.

Australia is pleased to be the first and largest donor
to UN-Women's Global Acceleration Instrument for
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action
(GAI). This is an important tool in strengthening the
capacity of women's organizations to participate in
peace processes and respond to crises and emergencies.
Australia is pleased that the GAI has already
been implemented in Burundi, a nation where women
have historically played important roles in mediation
and reconciliation processes. With the support of the
GAI, and Australian funding, the network of women
mediators is scaling up its activities to support women's
participation in formal and informal peace negotiations.
Australia urges other Member States to support the GAI.

In conclusion, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate and for the opportunity
it presents for all Member States to reaffirm their
commitment to ensuring the effective engagement of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.

