Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to commend
Bolivia for having convened today's important debate.

Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
valuable remarks. I also thank the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her
briefing. We are also pleased to see Ms. Randa Siniora
Atallah with us in the Chamber today; the voice of
civil society is important for us to hear. We are also
honoured by the presence of ministers from Sweden
and the Netherlands.

The need to include women in peacebuilding and
conflict resolution has been gradually acknowledged in
the international peacebuilding arena. The women and
peace and security agenda has been greatly enriched,
including by highlighting the disproportionate impact
of armed conflict on women and girls, the great
benefits of enhancing the involvement of women in
peace processes, and the absolute necessity of tackling
the question of sexual violence as a tactic of war. It
is also widely understood that women and men have
different experiences both during and after conflict and
that women have a unique set of challenges related to
peacebuilding and security.
There is no doubt that in spite of the achievements
registered, much remains to be done. There has been
a marginal increase in the number of women involved
in formal peace talks, and, consequently, women's
concerns are rarely on the agenda of peace talks. A
major challenge is that women are often perceived as
not having the skills, knowledge or social status needed
to bring about change in post-conflict environments.
Changing this requires a shift in mindset by negotiators
and mediators as to how they View the role of women.

We welcome the focus of this year's debate on
political and economic empowerment. We believe
there is a need for a broader discussion in the Security
Council on the importance of women's empowerment
in conflict and post-conflict settings. In this context,
I would like to focus on the following key points:
leadership, empowerment and education.

The meaningful participation of women in peace
processes and broader political processes is reflected in
the quality of such participation, not in the number of
women who participate; it is about women's leadership.
We need to identify and support policies that strengthen
not only women's voices but also women's leadership
in decision-making processes during peacebuilding,
and also to ensure that women have a strong voice in
decision-making, from the initial peacemaking process
to the establishment and development of local and
national governmental institutions. We know that there
are women who are adequately trained for these roles,
that women are available for high-level appointments
and, further, that qualified women are everywhere.

One of the factors that enables women to participate
more actively in society and peacebuilding processes
is economic empowerment. Basic economic stability
helps women live securely, have greater leverage to
earn respect in their communities, and become active
and contributing members of society. It gives them
the courage to speak up about violence and abuse.
Empowerment is about much more than acknowledging
the important work that women already do. It is also
about how power and resources such as land and water
are distributed and who makes the decisions. Fostering
and consolidating women's economic empowerment
is crucial to the full participation of women in society
and must therefore be a collaborative effort. It requires
action to be taken within United Nations bodies and in
cooperation with other international organizations and
the international community and, most importantly,
it requires action by local communities in post-
conflict countries.
I very much agree with my predecessor that we
need action. In this context, allow me to share some
information about Polish development assistance and
our projects. Over the past several years, Poland has
been supporting women's economic recovery and
empowerment in Palestine. This year we have focused
on enhancing women's entrepreneurship, supporting
newly established, women-run businesses and creating
jobs. Polish aid has also financed the implementation
of sustainable irrigation systems in home gardens in
the West Bank. This new irrigation technology can
save water and increase crop yields by up to 20 per
cent. Larger crops will not only enhance the food
security of Palestinian women and their families, but
also constitute a source of additional income. This
project has not only given those women a strong tool
for their economic empowerment but also contributed
to fostering gender quality.

Allow me to make my last point. No discussion
of women's empowerment would be complete without
a reference to the role that education must play in
this process. Education is a catalyst for achieving
equal participation in society and achieving women's
integration into long-term economic recovery. It is
also an important step towards removing the obstacles
that impede women's full participation in political
life, conflict prevention, and peace and transitional
justice processes.

I am very pleased to inform the Council that Poland
has just adopted its first-ever national action plan on
women and peace and security. This clearly shows
our comprehensive commitment to implementing the
Council's resolutions on women and peace and security.
The plan set four main outcomes for the period 2018-
2021: the meaningful participation ofwomen in conflict
prevention and peacekeeping; the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda; the protection
of and support for victims of conflict-related sexual
and gender-based violence; and, finally, the promotion
and development of the women and peace and security
agenda in Poland.

If we are serious about our commitment to a more
peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world, there is
simply no alternative to investing in women, giving them
a voice in all relevant decision-making processes and
supporting their political and economic empowerment.
We need to stop seeing women as victims of war and,
rather, look at them as leaders for peace.

