Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like,
Mr. President, to extend the gratitude of the Nigerian
delegation to you for having convened this crucially
important meeting on women and peace and security. I
add my voice to those who have expressed appreciation
to Ms. Margot Wallstrom for her presence in the
Chamber and for her very, very inspiring briefing. We
recognize the important role of her mandate in
protecting women and girls in conflict areas, and
Nigeria fully supports and associates itself with her
work.

Of course, our gratitude goes also to Ms. Rachel
Mayanja, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. She has
been on the front lines, and we appreciate her efforts.

Today's deliberations reaffirm the great
importance that we collectively attach to the impact of
conflict on women and to the role that women should
play in helping to prevent and resolve conflicts. We are
concerned that, in spite of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008), which became beacons of hope for
millions of women and young girls, crimes of rape and
sexual violence persist. However, we share a sense of
optimism that, given our collective will, especially in
the Security Council, we can bring an end to impunity
and to this crime against humanity. For countries like
my own, which are actively involved in peacekeeping
efforts in our subregion and around the world, there is
no better time than now to make the best efforts to
achieve the realization of resolution 1325 (2000).
Nigeria is one of the four Member States to pilot a
gender and peacekeeping framework, and we consider
that effort a vital part of the global commitment to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The corollary of
that commitment is a greater role for women in
peacebuilding and conflict prevention, and the
reduction of large-scale violations of women's rights in
armed conflicts.

The work of both the Security Council and the
Secretary-General in detailing and delineating the steps
to be taken towards the full actualization of the goals
contained in resolution 1325 (2000) and the Beijing
Platform for Action to prevent violence against women
is highly appreciated. Nevertheless, the slow pace of
progress towards the fulfilment of the objectives of
those two instruments continues to give us cause for
concern.

With this in mind, Nigeria welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/ 173), which, in
proposing indicators against which best practices can
be measured, addresses the issue of women and peace
and security with a greater degree of clarity. In framing
the indicators around the pillars of prevention,
participation, protection and relief and recovery, the
report appropriately places the role and experience of
women front and centre in the work of the United
Nations on peace and security. Broad consultations
with key actors to develop these indicators are
absolutely necessary during the pilot phase.

The recommendations for the pilot programme
are cogent. However, we consider the task of building
consensus, backed by reliable funding commitments, of
utmost importance. A collective undertaking from the
international community to share knowledge and
expertise to facilitate the pilot phase and the
subsequent implementation of the proposed framework
are also very critical. With these commitments in place,
the objectives of resolution 1325 (2000) would
ultimately constitute the bedrock of the United Nations
peacekeeping and conflict-prevention procedures.

The progress of the pilot programme should be
included in subsequent reports by the Secretary-
General on a themed basis in order for monitoring and
accountability measures to be both meaningful and
effective. In addition, the Secretary-General should
identify and report on what further resources are
necessary. This is to ensure the efficient execution of
the enormous task of coordinating inputs from all
parties concerned.

In conclusion, Nigeria supports the draft
presidential statement before us today.

