Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It gives
me great pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would like to thank Rwanda, and in particular its
Minister for Foreign Affairs, for convening this
meeting, which is an opportunity to examine the
measures taken by the Security Council to promote the
participation of women in the resolution of conflicts.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
for their important statements and for participating in
this meeting.

The State of Qatar understands that, as highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/149),
there are still obstacles to women's participation
and representation in decision-making, peace and
transitional processes and that all regional and
international bodies should support international
standards to enhance women's participation in the
protection of women's and girls' human rights, as well
as in efforts at establishing peace.

With respect to enhancing the role of women,
the State of Qatar has taken a special interest in the
participation of women in the political field through
many initiatives aimed at enabling women to play
their full role in various areas, including the political
and economic fields. Women have been appointed to
important positions, including as ministers. The wife of
the Amir of Qatar has supported educational, research
and development programmes. The State of Qatar has
adopted a preventive policy so as to protect human rights,
in particular the rights of women. That was reflected
in our 2013 plan, which states that women have a very
important role to play in our society, particularly by
participating in decision-making processes, especially
in the economic and social fields.

We cannot talk about women and peace and
security without dealing with the root causes of the
problem. The protection of women is therefore not just
a humanitarian issue but also an one that guides our
efforts in many fields, especially in the application of
rules for the protection of women in times of conflict
without discrimination or selectivity. We must call on all
parties to conflicts to take special measures to protect
women and girls from sexual violence in conflict.

It is troubling that, even as we are holding this
meeting, many women and girls in various parts of the
world, including in the Arab world, are being subjected
to forms of violence that lead to their killing and to the
displacement of millions of people, especially women
and children, who are more vulnerable and therefore
more affected by such situations. They are exposed in
particular to sexual violence and to psychological and
physical violence. Women and girls are exposed to the
worst kinds of violence resulting from conflict in our
region, and they bear the brunt of that violence. In the
Arab region, women in Palestine suffer from the unjust
measures taken by the Israeli occupiers. Women in the
Syrian Arab Republic are exposed to discrimination
and to psychological and sexual violence, detention and
imprisonment. Those acts are crimes against humanity
and war crimes. The conflict in Syria has forced women
and girls to flee from cities because ofa lack of security
and a lack of humanitarian access to those women and
girls. That was reiterated in the report of the Secretary-
General on sexual violence in conflict.

In conclusion, the continued attention by the
international community to the role of women in peace
and security and the enhancement of the role of women
in decision-making processes will have positive effects
on international peace and security and will mitigate
the catastrophic results of conflicts all over the world.

