Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Let me commend
you, Mr. President, for the hard work of your delegation
in bringing the negotiations on resolution 2467 (2019)
to a successful conclusion. Allow me to offer a few
short remarks at the end of a long day.

In the first instance, we want to refer to some of
the situations that are particularly relevant for our
discussions today. In Myanmar, there have been
patterns of widespread atrocities, including sexual
violence, against Rohingya women and girls. There
is strong evidence that the threat and use of sexual
Violence have been a push factor for forced displacement
on a massive scale. We would like to hear from the
Special Representative how we can best address the
increasing prevalence of children born of wartime
rape and provide necessary services to mothers and
children without contributing to their stigmatization. In
Libya, migrant women and girls are very vulnerable to
conflict-related sexual violence. Many are exposed to
forced prostitution and sexual exploitation, amounting
to conditions of sexual slavery. In Syria, displacement
camps pose a high risk of sexual violence and abduction
for women and girls. Such violence during arrest
predominantly affects women and girls residing in the
home of a targeted male, while both males and females
are among the victims in detention settings.

Secondly, women and girls are particularly
vulnerable to conflict-related sexual violence, but
research, including by the All Survivors Project,
documents that men and boys are also specifically
targeted, for example, in Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan. And yet sexual violence against men and
boys remains seriously underreported, due to a culture
of taboo and the stigmatization of the victims, which
also restrains them in their already limited access to
services. We welcome the progress made today in the
adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) to ensure timely
and safe survivor-centred assistance for all survivors,
including psychosocial and health-care services.

Thirdly, we reiterate our strong commitment to the
fight against human trafficking and modern slavery,
for which conflict situations pose a special risk. We
support in the particular the call in resolution 2331
(2016) to engage all relevant stakeholders in the fight
against illicit financial flows stemming from human
trafficking, including sexual slavery. This call has
paved the way for the Liechtenstein Initiative for a
Financial Sector Commission on Modern Slavery
and Human Trafficking, a public-private partnership,
carried out in cooperation with the Governments of
Australia and the Netherlands and with support from
the United Nations University. This work will result in
a set of measures for the global financial sector that
will be presented publicly in September in New York.

My final point relates to the importance of
accountability as an essential part of the fight against
conflict-related sexual violence. States have the
primary responsibility in this respect, but international
criminal justice mechanisms, in particular the
International Criminal Court, can significantly
contribute to strengthening national capacities, as
called for in Sustainable Development Goal 16, on the
basis of the principle of complementarity. The Court
has made sexual and gender-based crimes one of its
strategic priorities, which is a reflection of the very
progressive stance of the Court's founding Statute
on this issue. There is a particular responsibility for
the Security Council to ensure accountability for
these crimes, in accordance with the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct
against mass atrocity crimes, supported by two thirds
of the Council's membership.

We also commend the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria,
whose annual report was discussed in the General
Assembly today (see A/73/PV.76). It has already made
significant progress in operationalizing its mandate to
effectively address sexual and gender-based crimes. We
expect the accountability mechanism established by the
Human Rights Council for Myanmar to build on this
good practice.

