The President: I thank the representative of
Nepal for his kind words addressed to my delegation.

I shall now make a statement as the representative
of Namibia, and on behalf of my Minister, who, due to
other equally important engagements, is not able to be
with us this morning.

Let me begin by expressing my hearty
congratulations to the Secretary-General on his
personal participation in this debate and his important
statement. We are proud of him and fully support his
leadership in this and other worthy endeavours.

The Secretary-General's Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, Ms.
Angela King, made a constructive contribution in this
meeting, and I thank her for her outstanding work. The
preparations for the meeting would not have been
successful without the cooperation and advice of the
United Nations Fund for Women (UNIFEM). I thank
Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, its Executive Director, for her
dedication. The continuing efforts being made by
UNIFEM. to assist women's peace activities at the
grassroots level are greatly appreciated by all. These
two distinguished United Nations officials have
brought to the table unique perspectives, factual
accounts and practical proposals for action. My thanks
also go to all the agencies for their contributions and
support.

This open debate is the first of its kind convened
by the Council. It is a good omen that it is taking place
on United Nations Day in the year 2000. Fifty-five
years ago today the Charter of the United Nations came
into being. Yet it has taken the international community
many decades to recognize that women are among the
principal victims of war, conflict and insecurity. They
must thus be treated as indispensable partners in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Today's meeting therefore constitutes a new and
significant beginning for the Security Council; the
Council should conscientiously make use of the
contributions women can make in dealing with the
issues of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention,
protection of women and girls in armed conflict and
peace-making, peacekeeping and support operations.

The video images we all saw at the beginning of
this meeting tell the full story and its implications. No
one can deny the fact that women shoulder the heavy
burden of sustaining embattled societies, while
attending to traumas, miseries and violence during
armed conflicts. Regrettably, peace negotiations are
habitually male-dominated, the result being under-
utilization of the capabilities of women in conflict
prevention, resolution and settlement and a wilful
disregard of their concerns.

Armed conflict affects women in special ways.
Women demonstrate this time and again, but apparently
to no avail. They are among the first civilians to
become refugees or internally displaced persons.
Nonetheless, they are the ones who are expected to
look after children left in a state of despair and
suffering. Women assume the responsibility of picking
up the pieces, bringing together family life and
promoting social harmony in the aftermath of war.
However, there are no special measures aimed at
assisting them during and after armed conflict. The
impact of warfare and death on children requires
purposeful attention, as do - to no less a degree - the
related negative effects on women. In particular, as we
are reviewing United Nations peace operations, we
need to have a better understanding of the impact of
conflict on women and girls in order to ensure adequate
provision for their safety and protection.

As regards children, Security Council resolution
1261 (1999), adopted on 25 August 1999, among other
things,

"Urges States and all relevant parts of the
United Nations system to intensify their efforts to
ensure an end to the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict in violation of
international law through political and other
efforts, including promotion of the availability of
alternatives for children to their participation in
armed conflict". (para. 13)

Doing that will lessen the burden of mothers and of
other women. May I express here a word of gratitude to
the Jamaican presidency during the month of July for
pushing that heart-wrenching issue a step further into
the limelight.

Never before has the necessity for equal
participation by women at the peace table been felt
more keenly than it is today. During the special session
of the General Assembly to review the implementation
of the Beijing Platform for Action, this issue was
repeatedly emphasized, and urgent calls were made for
world peace and for an end to armed conflict and
human suffering. Those cries for peace and human
security still resonate. We must listen to women and
engage them in the search for lasting solutions. Women
have the right to participate in aspects of peace
processes, peace negotiations and the implementation
of agreements as well as in post-conflict monitoring,
peace enforcement and reconstruction.

Gender-based violence against women and girls is
widely recorded, and calls out for an international
awareness campaign to put a complete end to it.
Namibia welcomes the suggestion that the United
Nations maintain an open roster of qualified women for
recruitment and deployment in key positions in the
system. Women constitute half of the population, and
possess half of the world's brain-power and experience.
For this to begin to happen, mindsets, especially
those of men, must change and must give way to new
thinking and to a new beginning for the United Nations
in the field of conflict resolution and peacekeeping.
Now is the time to move away from perceiving women
only as victims of conflict and to see them also, and
more importantly, as equal participants in securing
peace and security in the world.

In conflict situations, violence against women,
including rape, is used as a weapon of war in
unconscionable violation of women's human rights and
dignity. It is timely and imperative that the full force of
international humanitarian and human rights law be
applied effectively against all culprits.

Namibia supports the strengthening of the
capacity of women to participate in all United Nations
peace operations and to participate fully in decision-
making at all levels. Women should continue to be
involved in greater numbers in ongoing efforts to
promote peace and to resolve conflicts, including
through the appointment of qualified African women as
special envoys and representatives of the Secretaries-
General of the United Nations and of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU). In that regard, Namibia
welcomes the contribution made by the OAU's African
Women's Committee on Peace and Development.
Efforts should be made to enhance further cooperation
with it. We are convinced that if and when a gender
unit is established in the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, a fruitful link with the
African Women's Committee will be established.

The mandates of peace missions, peacekeeping
operations and peace-building activities need to have
provisions on the protection of women. Also, women
should take on high-level roles in field-based civilian
peace and security operations at senior decision-
making and management levels. A good beginning has
been made, which we welcome, concerning a gender
unit in the peacekeeping missions in Kosovo and in
East Timor. We encourage the Secretary-General to
establish similar units in other peacekeeping missions.
To date, the Security Council has dispatched successful
fact-finding missions to several conflict areas. In our
view, a senior gender expert should be included in such
missions, so that the Council can gain a full
appreciation of the gender dimension of ongoing or
potential conflicts.

Just last month, world leaders, at the Millennium
Summit, commended the report (S/2000/809) of the
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations chaired by
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and called for its early
consideration and for the early implementation of its
relevant recommendations. Like other countries
represented here, Namibia laments the Brahimi report's
lack of clear and categorical emphasis on gender
perspectives and on an effective role for women in
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peace-building.
That unfortunate situation and other shortcomings
should be rectified during the implementation process.

In that context, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations organized a timely and successful seminar,
held from 29 to 31 May 2000 at Windhoek, Namibia.
Its theme was mainstreaming a gender perspective in
multidimensional peace support operations. The
Namibian Government and the people of Namibia were
immensely honoured to have hosted that seminar and
offered all possible support to ensure its success. The
Namibia Plan of Action, inter alia, recommended that

"Lessons learned from current and prior missions
on gender should be incorporated at the planning
stage of a new mission" (S/2000/693, annex 11, para. 4)

and that
"The current format of reporting, particularly
with regard to situation reports and periodic
reports of the Secretary-General, should include
progress on gender mainstreaming throughout
peacekeeping missions". (para. 8)

Namibia fully endorses the Plan of Action and urges all
concerned to take its proposals into account when
formulating policy objectives and implementation
plans in respect of the Brahimi report.

In his previous capacity in another principal
organ of the United Nations, my Minister for Foreign
Affairs had numerous opportunities to address many
topical social and humanitarian issues, particularly
during the three key special sessions of the General
Assembly, relating respectively to small island
developing States, to Beijing+5 and to Copenhagen+5.
Also, as a follow-up to the Secretary-General's 1998
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/318), we established a working group to
monitor the implementation process. We have had the
first report of that working group, so ably prepared by
the Permanent Representatives of Singapore and of
Spain, whom I heartily thank once again for their
excellent work and their dedication.

It was pointed out that peace, security and social
development are unceasingly and without exception
being undermined in one way or another by the easy
availability of small arms and light weapons. We are
now all agreed about the devastating effects of these
deadly weapons on civilian populations in Africa and
in other developing countries.

I know that this pressing issue will be dealt with
in a coordinated manner in the near future in Mali.
Needless to say, this type of weaponry clearly
contributes to prolonging armed conflict and imposes
severe hardships, especially on women and children.
By the same token, the process of disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement and rehabilitation of ex-
combatants should take into account the special needs
of women and girls.

Landmine-awareness campaigns and demining
activities cannot ignore the concerns and interests of
the real victims, namely women and children. As I said
elsewhere, women are not really begging for favours;
they are actually demanding their legitimate rights and
opportunities to contribute to peace, development and
prosperity.

The views expressed today indicate that the
maintenance of peace and security is a collective effort.
It should therefore involve all women and men for our
common good. To that end, let us put our words into
deeds to make this, our one world, a peaceful and
secure place for this and future generations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list
for this meeting. The next meeting of the Security
Council to continue the consideration of the item on
the agenda will be fixed in consultation with the
members of the Security Council.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.
