Mr. Trautwein (Germany): We greatly welcome
this year's debate marking the fourth anniversary of
this important resolution and thank you, Sir, for having
taken this important initiative. We particularly
welcome the fact that the focus is on gender-based
violence and on strategies addressing that problem.

I thank Mr. Guehenno, Mrs. Arbour and
Ms. Obaid for their important briefings this morning.
My delegation also aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered by the Dutch Ambassador later, on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union.

Violence against women is an issue of the highest
priority because of its human, political, social and
economic dimensions. The phenomenon of gender-
based violence can be overcome only by the
empowerment of women in all aspects of public and
private life.

Unfortunately, the list of countries in conflict
having a history of gender-based atrocities is long and
includes countries from all continents, including Haiti,
Afghanistan, Iraq, Myanmar, the former Yugoslavia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and others. The
fact that women account for the vast majority of
victims of conflicts and are still significantly
underrepresented at all levels of decision-making
indicates that we need tools and instruments that
promote our common vision as expressed in Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000).

The continuing extreme violence against women
and girls in the Darfur region is a case in point. In
order to improve the situation, as well as the future
prospects for women in the Sudan, a gender dimension
must be integrated into the peace talks. The ratification
by the Sudanese Government of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women - the 25th anniversary of which has just been
celebrated - would mark another significant step in
the right direction.

I would like to welcome the excellent proposals
by the Secretary-General on how to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), which aim at addressing the
issue of women, peace and security in an active way.
While fundamentally agreeing with all of those
proposals, I would like to focus on several of their
action-oriented aspects.

A gender unit is the main guarantor for the
effective integration of a gender perspective in any
United Nations mission. The Minister of State of the
German Foreign Office referred to this requirement
during last October's debate on resolution 1325 (2000),
at that time referring to the United Nations mission in
Afghanistan. However, a gender unit alone is not
sufficient even if it is supplied with adequate
resources, which, unfortunately, is quite often still not
the case. Given the scope of gender-based
discrimination, including violence, we need to ensure
that all substantive units of a peacekeeping operation,
starting with the United Nations assessment team,
include specialists with gender expertise.
Therefore, more personnel with gender expertise
have to be selected during the recruitment process.
That also requires that the United Nations continue to
train its personnel, including at the level of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and that
Member States invest more in gender training of
potential peacekeeping staff. The German Government
has made the latter a political priority in its
endeavours. We strongly believe in the need for
accountability for wartime violence against women,
and in the necessity to end impunity. Time-bound goals
concerning the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will be very helpful in that regard.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) certainly
has a key role to play with regard to the investigation
and prosecution of gender-based crimes. However, its
efforts must be supplemented by national legal
mechanisms. I also would like to mention the very
recent initiative for a conference on gender justice
organized by the United Nations Development Fund
for Women (UNIFEM) and others. Let me express the
hope that there will be a concrete follow-up on the key
issue of genderjustice.

We are now beginning to understand that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes, which have long been neglected, must
also be targeted to include women and girls, since in
Africa, for instance, one-third of the combatants,
including their so-called supporters, are female. As far
as reintegration is concerned, we have to respect that
female ex-combatants might well not wish to be
reintegrated into structures in which their rights,
including economic rights, are not guaranteed.

Let me re-emphasize that Germany, a friend of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), is deeply
committed to the vision set forth in that landmark
resolution and has undertaken various efforts to realize
that vision. Germany is one of the few countries to
have provided a detailed report on its national
initiatives concerning the implementation of that
resolution. We stress the need to include women at all
levels of peace negotiations and conflict resolution.
The promotion of the full participation of women in
post-conflict and reconstruction processes is a political
priority.

Having said that, I wish to stress the fact that
more can be done by Member States in supporting the
United Nations system-wide implementation of the
resolution, in all its aspects. From our point of view,
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
uniting member States and non-member States of the
Security Council, should integrate a gender perspective
into its work, as a matter of priority.

Finally, I wish to emphasize the very important
contribution of civil society and, in particular, of the
non-governmental organizations, which were rightly
given an opportunity to meet with the members of the
Security Council in an Arrias-style meeting last week.

We welcome initiatives, such as those by Canada,
Chile, the United Kingdom and the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, to organize
round tables with representatives from all Security
Council member States, where strategies on the full
implementation of the resolution are discussed in a
remarkably open and constructive atmosphere.

