Ms. Holguin Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I thank you for having convened this open
debate, almost 17 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. I should
like also to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; Michaelle Jean, of the
International Organization of la Francophonie; and
Charo Mina-Rojas, Colombia's National Coordinator
of Advocacy and Outreach for the Black Communities'
Process, for their contributions.

This meeting represents an opportunity to share
best practices and the challenges encountered in the
implementation of this agenda, but above all, in the face
of new challenges, to revitalize the discussion and take
effective action ensuring the participation and leadership
of women in peace and peacekeeping processes.

Our process, which put an end to the conflict, was
characterized by an active and major participation of
women. During the negotiation phase, we were at the
table, I myself as negotiator, and in the negotiating
team more broadly. In addition, the work of the
sub-commission on gender was a cross-cutting presence
throughout the entire final agreement, as recognized in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/861), which
states that the percentage of signed peace agreements
containing gender-specific provisions increased only
because the Colombian peace agreement contained
more than 100 such provisions.

Close to one year after the signing of the
agreement, Columbia remains committed to ensuring
the participation of women in the implementation of the
peace agenda. We have major challenges and goals in
this phase, and the role ofwomen is vital in this respect.
To this end, we have created the institutions necessary
to implement the agreement, including a specialized
gender unit made up of seven women leaders of
organizations of rural women, victims of armed conflict
and civil-society organizations. They will help us to
achieve the transformations to which the agreement is
directed so as to offer women, especially rural women,
better living conditions, which will translate into their
empowerment and economic autonomy, as well as
the creation of work spaces in decent conditions, in
a framework of equality, so as to break the cycles of
violence that violate the rights of women. We are also
working to incorporate a gender focus in the framework
for the implementation of the agreement.

As important as is the presence of women during
negotiations, it will be equally important in the
implementation process. The participation in the
peacebuilding phase, which will take us several years,
is tangible in the composition ofthe institutions created
for the purpose of transitional justice, whose members
were elected in September. In the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, 28 of the 51 judges are women, including the
President, and eight are Afro-descendants or indigenous
people. In addition, a woman was elected Director of
the Search Unit for Missing Person.

Colombia recognizes the need to ensure
accountability for crimes of sexual violence committed
in the framework of conflict. That is why the final
agreement provides that such crimes cannot be subject
to amnesty. In addition, the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace plans to create an investigation unit with a special
team for cases of sexual violence.

I wish also to highlight the fact that the first special
political mission agreed by the Security Council was the
one with the largest ever number of women - almost
20 per cent of observers. We hope that the second will
maintain or even surpass those levels.

We believe that our process, with its advantages
and drawbacks, can be one of the references for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in a way that
contributes to achieving tangible results, the realization
of projects and the development ofjoint initiatives, and
so that lessons learned can be used to advantage in other
contexts. The past years have shown us that committed
work brings about significant progress and tangible
results that have a positive impact on the realities of
women, but they are, of course, not enough.

As Ms. Mina-Rojas said at the beginning of today's
debate, the peace process has not only put an end to war
and violence, it has also helped us deal together with the
roots of the conflict. That is what we aim to do with the
Agreement; that is the challenge we face from now on
in terms of its implementation. We need the unwavering
commitment of States, as well as the effective work of
the entire United Nations system, in particular of the
Security Council, to ensure genuine participation by
women, and thereby contribute to achieving the just
and equitable societies that we all desire.

