Mr. Mohd. Radzi (Malaysia): Let me join others
in expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for convening this open debate of
the Council on the important question of women and
peace and security, especially in the context of the fifth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
concerning the participation of women in peace
processes. We would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
remarks and the other invited speakers for their
important contributions.

Resolution 1325 (2000) and the three subsequent
presidential statements on women and peace and
security (S/PRST/2001/31, S/PRST/2002/32 and S/PRST/2004/40) constitute an important landmark and
provide a practical framework for our action. The
Council has clearly acknowledged the importance of
bringing gender perspectives to the centre of all United
Nations efforts related to peace and security and has
called for appropriate action under a number of
thematic and cross-cutting areas. My delegation
commends the efforts of the Inter-Agency Task Force
on Women and Peace and Security, in partnership with
Member States and non-governmental organizations, in
the preparation of the system-wide action plan, which
will put greater focus on enhanced collaboration for the
full implementation of the resolution. In that regard,
my delegation noted with interest the action plan
contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-
General on women and peace and security
(S/2005/636).

At the recent 2005 world summit, our leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to the full and effective
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). They underlined the importance of integrating
a gender perspective and of women having the
opportunity for equal participation and full
involvement in all efforts to maintain and promote
peace and security, as well as the need to increase the
role of women in decision-making at all levels.

We are disappointed that, despite the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), there seems to have been a
merely nominal increase, if any at all, in the number of
women participating in formal peace processes.
Women's needs and concerns continued to be ignored
in peace agreements, and women's organizations are
often not given the necessary support to enable them to
participate, especially in protracted peace negotiations.
It is our hope that the adoption of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
will provide new impetus leading to the actual
realization of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).

We call on all Member States, regional and
subregional organizations and the United Nations
system to enhance the role of women in decision-
making with regard to all peace processes and to post-
conflict reconstruction and rebuilding of societies. In
that regard, my delegation welcomes the various
initiatives and actions undertaken by Member States,
United Nations entities, civil society organizations and
other relevant actors focused on supporting and
increasing the representation of women in peace
negotiations and mainstreaming gender perspectives
into peace agreements.

While we share the concern at the
underrepresentation of women in formal peace
processes, we are equally alarmed at the persistent
obstacles and impediments women face as a result of
situations such as violence against women, shattered
economies and social structures, lawlessness, poverty
and limited access to education and resources. Action
must be taken to remove those obstacles and
impediments. Malaysia believes that more needs to be
done to achieve the greater participation and the
effective contribution of women at the negotiating
table and the involvement of women in developing and
implementing post-conflict strategies and programmes.
In that regard, my delegation encourages the Secretary-
General to maintain regular contacts with women's
organizations and networks, make use of their
knowledge, expertise and resources and ensure their
system-wide involvement in reconstruction processes,
particularly at the decision-making level.

We wish to express our abhorrence at the
continuing victimization of and violence against
women and girls, especially in situations of armed
conflict, and the systemic use of abduction and rape by
parties to a conflict as an instrument of war. We would
like States to take the necessary measures against all
perpetrators of such acts, in accordance with the
principles of international law and domestic
legislation, and to make provisions for the protection
of women and girls in armed conflict. We wish to
reaffirm the relevance of section E, on women and
armed conflict, of Chapter IV of the Beijing Platform
for Action.

My delegation condemns in the strongest terms
all acts of sexual misconduct by all categories of
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We welcome the comprehensive report on sexual
exploitation and abuse by the United Nations
peacekeeping personnel contained in document
A/59/710, and the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations on its resumed session
(A/59/19/Add.1). In that connection, we join the
Council in supporting the efforts of the United Nations
to fully implement codes of conduct and disciplinary
procedures to prevent and respond to sexual
exploitation and to enhance monitoring and
enforcement mechanisms. We are convinced that the
strategies and actions included in the system-wide
action plan to fully implement the codes of conduct
and disciplinary procedures may contribute to the
reduction and, hopefully, the elimination of sexual
exploitation and abuse.

Malaysia believes that the issue of women in
relation to peace and security deserves the Security
Council's sustained attention. It is our hope that the
Council's deliberations on this issue will contribute to
the enhancement of the role of women in peace and
security and ensure the protection of women in
situations of armed conflict. Other interlocutors within
and outside the United Nations system could also be
major and vital players in that endeavour and should be
continuously engaged. Malaysia is committed to
working with others that share a similar interest in
advancing that agenda and ensuring the full
mainstreaming of women in activities in the pursuit of
securing peace and security.

