Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
joins in the statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union.
I welcome the initiative of the United States
presidency of the Council to convene this open debate.
In adopting resolution 1888 (2009) last year, the
Security Council improved the regime for combating

sexual violence in armed conflict. My delegation
reiterates its support for the work of Ms. Wallstrom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
welcome the progress made towards strengthening the
rule of law in countries in conflict. We welcome the
firm commitment of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, led by Alain Le Roy, and the contribution
of civil society and non-governmental organizations.
Resolution 1960 (2010), adopted today, will support
that momentum. UN Women must play its full role in
those common efforts.

At the same time, the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/604) gives cause for alarm. Sexual violence
continues to be used as a weapon of war by parties to
conflicts in a number of regions worldwide. We all
recall the mass rapes committed in Walikale this past
summer, and we expect the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to inform the
Security Council about measures taken to assist the
victims and to combat impunity.

Beyond that tragic situation, no one can remain
impassive to the violence perpetrated in the Sudan,
Afghanistan, Iraq and Burma against women belonging
to minority ethnic groups, or in Cote d'Ivoire, where
recent developments have caused increased concern.
We expect that procedures carried out in Guinea
following the crimes perpetrated in the Conakry
stadium in September 2009 will be rapidly completed.
However, we welcome the development of a strategy to
combat sexual violence in Chad and the establishment
of a special tribunal in Liberia.

The United Nations has a particular responsibility
with regard to the phenomenon of sexual violence.
Indeed, peacekeeping operations must establish
strategies on sexual violence. Gender advisors,
advisors on the protection of women, and human rights
units have a vital role to play in this context. It is also
essential to engage in dialogue with parties to armed
conflict on the issue of sexual violence. Every
opportunity must be taken to educate the parties on
their obligations and to encourage them to change their
behaviour. The fight against sexual violence must be
accompanied by programmes to assist victims and
provide them with care and opportunities for
rehabilitation.
Given the scope of the challenges to be addressed
by the United Nations, France welcomes the Council's
resolve in this area. The resolution we adopted today
has three main areas of progress. First, it will allow the
Council to receive reliable information in real time on
which to base its actions. France therefore supports the
establishment of procedures to monitor, analyse and
communicate information on situations of concern.

The Council has set political parametres:
coherence and coordination on the ground, on the one
hand, and respect for the integrity and specificity of the
mechanism to protect children in armed conflict, on the
other. In that context, the United Nations and all its
entities must now work to establish the most effective
system possible on the ground.

The resolution then provides a way to list parties
who commit systematic sexual violence. That
represents important progress in harmonizing human
rights protection regimes established by the Council to
the benefit of women and children. Implementing these
measures will require strengthened cooperation
between Ms. Coomaraswamy and Ms. Wallstrom.

The resolution finally strengthens the prospects
of sanctions against the perpetrators and those
responsible for sexual violence. It is vital that the
Council systematically examine the possibility of
including sexual violence as a criteria for sanctions
during the establishment or review of the mandates of
sanctions committees. The resolution requests the
parties to make specific commitments and to
implement them on the ground. Among these, we
attach particular importance to the fight against
impunity. Allow me to reiterate here the contribution of
the International Criminal Court in cases where sexual
Violence constitutes war crimes, crimes against
humanity or crimes of genocide.

In conclusion, our commitment to combating
sexual violence is inseparable from the framework of
follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000) in strengthening
the role of women in conflict prevention and settlement
and in peacebuilding.

