Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
the United States delegation and in particular you,
Madam, for your personal involvement and leadership
in advancing the cause of women around the world and
for your most commendable efforts in mobilizing the
Council around the adoption of this important
resolution today. I also wish to express our deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
commitment to combating violence against women and
re-energizing the entire United Nations system in that
direction.

Today, with the adoption of resolution 1888
(2009), the Council has sent yet another strong
message to the world at large that violence against
women and children, particularly in situations of armed
conflict, is not acceptable and that such acts will never
be tolerated. Your presence here today, Madam,
amplifies this message and further solidifies our
resolve. Indeed, the women and children who continue
to be subjected to the cruelest forms of violence during
armed conflict shall hopefully see that they are not
alone in their plight and that the international
community will spare no effort to stop their suffering.
This is why Turkey has supported this resolution
from the very beginning and actively contributed to its
negotiation, bearing in mind the Council's primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians in times of
armed conflict, in particular women and children.

The resolution we have adopted today has many
important aspects, but maybe its most significant added
value derives from its action-oriented nature. Indeed,
in the resolution we not only condemn those who
perpetrate acts of violence against women, but also call
for action against them. With the establishment of a
new mechanism and the decision to appoint a special
representative in particular, the United Nations and the
international community have demonstrated their firm
commitment and political will to effectively preventing
sexual violence against women, combating impunity
and enforcing accountability and the rule of law.

Turkey is fully committed to exerting every effort
in order to ensure the effective implementation of the
resolution. Together with resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008), resolution 1888 (2009) provides us with a
comprehensive framework for empowering women,
and we will do our utmost to make the best use of this
opportunity.

