Mr. Puri (India): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council.

We are happy to participate in today's open
debate on women and peace and security. The theme of
today's discussion, namely, "Women and peace and
security: responding to the needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations for sustainable peace and
security", is both timely and pertinent. India attaches
very high importance to ensuring concrete action in
this area, and welcomes the report (S/2009/465) of the
Secretary-General.

We co-sponsored resolution 1888 (2009), which
was adopted last week under the presidency of the
United States. We were also happy to co-sponsor
resolution 1889 (2009), which was adopted today.
Nevertheless, let me underscore that the issue of
women and peace and security has implications that are
cross-cutting, as well as multi-dimensional. Therefore,
the need to discuss those issues in the universal
forum- the General Assembly - cannot be over-
emphasized.

India has consistently held that greater
participation by women in areas of conflict prevention,
peace negotiations, peacekeeping and post-conflict
reconstruction is the sine qua non condition for lasting
peace and security. As far as the United Nations is
concerned, its achievements have been at best modest,
in particular in terms of the deployment of women in
peacekeeping forces. Women currently comprise only
8 per cent of United Nations police officers, and about
2 per cent of the military personnel, deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Given the critical
role of the United Nations in peacekeeping operations
and peacebuilding in post-conflict countries, we firmly
believe that the United Nations must lead by example.
Precisely for those reasons, India has contributed a
female peacekeeping unit of 100 personnel, which is at
present deployed in Liberia. That mission in Liberia
stands out as the only one of its kind among the
ongoing United Nations peacekeeping operations.

We commend the work of the Secretary-General
in mainstreaming the gender perspective in the United
Nations recruitment process. We hope that that process
will be institutionalized at the earliest possible time,
and that we will achieve a gender balance in the United
Nations system, especially in the field, where is it most
urgently required. There is also great need to ensure
greater representation of women in high decision-
making positions at the United Nations.

It is a matter of deep regret that the international
community has to repeatedly debate the issue of sexual
and other forms of violence against women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. That abhorrent behaviour
has to be unequivocally, unambiguously and resolutely
condemned, whether it is perpetrated by parties to
armed conflicts, peacekeeping personnel, including its
civilian component, or humanitarian actors.

The promotion and protection of the human rights
of women and girls in armed conflict continues to pose
a pressing challenge. There should be no tolerance for
gender-based violence. All cases of gender-based
violence in an armed conflict must be investigated, and
the perpetrators prosecuted. Let me assure the Council
that India will continue to contribute positively to
United Nations efforts to protect vulnerable groups, in
particular women and children, in conflict and
post-conflict societies. That needs to be done in a
comprehensive manner and with the active
involvement of all the departments and agencies of the
United Nations. I would also like to stress that the
international community needs to enhance cooperation
by providing new and additional financial resources
and by sharing experiences, expertise and capacity
building in areas of justice and rule of law.

