Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan
commends the French presidency for convening
this open debate and will resolutely join the United
Nations system, other Member States and numerous
partners to prevent and combat human trafficking in
situations of conflict-related sexual violence. We thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers Ms. Zainab
Bangura and Ms. Lisa Davis. My special thanks go
to Ms. Maria Giammarinaro, with whom I had the
privilege to serve at the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. We thank all speakers for
highlighting human trafficking as an unconscionable
violence against human dignity and a threat to stability
and the prospects for reconciliation and peacebuilding.
My delegation would therefore like to propose the
following recommendations.

Today, conflict-related sexual violence must be
fully addressed in all its dimensions as it is linked,
directly or indirectly, to the following factors: first,
the nature of conflict; secondly, the profile of the
perpetrators, including combatants, traffickers,
terrorists and violent extremists; thirdly, the victims,
including those from ethnic and religious minorities
in Africa and the Middle East; and fourthly, a climate
of impunity or State collapse, cross-border dimensions
and/or violations of the terms ofa ceasefire agreement.

The escalation of human trafficking for sexual
purposes has reached alarmingly unprecedented
proportions and requires cross-national interventions.
All efforts of the United Nations will require
coordination with the African Union, the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation, the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
the Caribbean Community and subregional structures,
whose effort and commitment we also applaud. We
support the African Union's momentous commitment
to women's empowerment and development to fulfil
Africa's Agenda 2063. Kazakhstan is ready to contribute
to those efforts.

The State has the primary responsibility by enacting
legislation in response to trafficking in persons and
strengthening the criminal justice system. This calls
for the full implementation of the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, and all relevant Security Council resolutions,
including 1325 (2000) and subsequent ones.

The criminal codes of countries should also be
updated and national legislative responses around
the world harmonized and made compatible for
cross-regional action. Human trafficking should
be criminalized in all countries with severe and
consistent punishments and an end should be put to
all impunity, accompanied by the training of law
enforcement and criminal justice officers. Inspired
by the strong commitment of France, the current
President of the Council, we have joined the code of
conduct for mass atrocities of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group and call on all to
abide by international principles of the rule of law and
human rights.

Resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2253 (2015), which
make it illegal to donate money to terrorist groups,
trade in oil and antiquities and make ransom payments,
should be implemented in full and by all Member
States. States need to work with sanctions committees
and also freeze the assets and finances of organized
networks by working in close cooperation with
INTERPOL, parliamentary groups, non-governmental
organizations and others. Kazakhstan believes that
some recommendations of the high-level review of the
united nations sanctions (S/2015/432, annex) adopted
in June 2015 could serve to improve the impact of
sanctions against individuals and entities involved in
trafficking for the purposes of sexual Violence.

We also fully support the United Nations zero-
tolerance policy on all forms of sexual exploitation
and abuse and strongly believe that preventing sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers should be an
absolute priority. All peacekeeping missions need to
have women's protection as fundamental elements to
their mandates with greater employment of women
military and police officers, with full training prior
to deployment. A gender focus must also be intrinsic
to human rights, the rule of law, transitional justice
and security sector reform units in multidimensional
operations. Kazakhstan is presently contributing to
the process by fielding its highly qualified military
observers with gender competence to the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara and the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. We hope to
expand that deployment in the future. Women should
be fully engaged in processes of conflict prevention,
resolution and social reconstruction, even at the highest
levels of peace agreements.

Sexual violence affects every aspect of a survivor's
life, both as a child and an adult. The victims of
human trafficking and sexual violence should receive
full, competent and speedy attention with increased
access to health care, psychological support, legal
assistance and socioeconomic reintegration. Often the
entire community also needs healing. Women with
disabilities face heightened vulnerability to sexual
violence and exploitation, owing as much to isolation,
the lack of support, physical immobility or infirmity.
In recognition of the risk faced by women maimed or
wounded by anti-personnel landmines, special services
will need to be mobilized for them as well.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Kazakhstan
shares the conviction of other Member States that the
dignity of and respect for women must be upheld in
times of conflict.

