Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you, Sir,
for presiding over the meeting today and your
delegation for organizing this open debate with a focus
on post-conflict situations. As a strong supporter of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008),
Liechtenstein agrees with the assessment reflected in
the concept paper prepared by your delegation
(S/2009/490) that much has been achieved but that
enormous challenges remain. Nine years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the participation of
women in conflict resolution, in particular in formal
peace processes, is still little more than rhetoric and
their protection from violent crimes is still elusive.

We have witnessed an alarming increase in sexual
violence in various conflicts around the world. The
victims are often women and children. Cessation of
hostilities does not guarantee an end to sexual violence -
sometimes quite the opposite. The influx of returning
refugees and displaced persons, the presence of large
numbers of demobilized ex-combatants, the widespread
lack of economic opportunity and the general
breakdown in social norms all contribute to increased
levels of sexual violence in post-conflict settings.

Such gender-based violence is often exacerbated
by the absence of effective judicial institutions and
impunity as a result thereof. Both resolution 1325
(2000) and resolution 1820 (2008) emphasize the
responsibility of all States to put an end to such
impunity and to prosecute those responsible for war
crimes, including acts of gender violence.

However, formal justice systems often lack the
required resources. Traditional conflict resolution
mechanisms are frequently applied in a manner that is
discriminatory and leaves women with limited access
to justice, thereby exacerbating a climate of impunity.
We therefore welcome the call on the Secretary-
General, in resolution 1888 (2009), to offer upon
request expertise that can be deployed rapidly to assist
national authorities to strengthen the rule of law. That
is a very important step and is fully in keeping with the
principle of complementarity, one of the main pillars of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), whose jurisdiction kicks in only when States are
unable or unwilling to prosecute at the national level.
Today, the ICC is addressing sexual violence in several
situations with which it is seized and thus is
contributing to the fight against impunity.

Resolution 1325 (2000) calls for an increase in
the participation of women at decision-making levels
in conflict resolution and peace processes. According
to data made available to the Council by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, only 2.4 per
cent of signatories to peace agreements are women and
no woman has ever been appointed as a chief mediator.
Thus our efforts to guarantee the full and equal
participation of women - as well-intentioned as they
may have been - have clearly been insufficient. We
hope that the input given during this debate today will
lead, nine years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), to significant improvements.

Some years ago, the Liechtenstein delegation
headed a group of like-minded ambassadors aimed at
increasing the presence of women in positions such as
special envoys and special representatives in particular.
The success of this cooperation with the then
Secretary-General was very modest, despite regular
expressions of good intentions.

Member States and the relevant intergovernmental
bodies must pursue strategies to ensure an increase in
women's participation in peace negotiations and
mediation, as well as in post-conflict reconstruction.
That would strengthen the perception that women are
stakeholders - as opposed to mere victims or aid
recipients. e welcome the efforts of the Secretary-
General to appoint more women to senior positions in
general, in particular in field missions, and we see
those efforts as a personal commitment on his part.

In preparation for the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we need concrete
action. Hence, we welcome the establishment of a United
Nations steering committee to enhance the visibility of
and to strengthen coordination within the United Nations
system regarding the preparations for the anniversary.
Liechtenstein, for its part, will support the project of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
launched by Switzerland and to be supported, it is hoped,
by other Member States, which will produce in time for
the anniversary a report that provides a substantive
overview of the work of the Council. That report will
demonstrate both the achievements and the remaining
gaps and challenges, and we hope that it can also serve
as a model for implementation in other areas.
