Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union.

Eleven years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security, we now have
an important regulatory body of resolutions and
statements. More important, we have proof that women
are the best agents of peacebuilding when they have
the resources and the normative framework to do so.

Spain welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/598*) and fully supports its
recommendations, as well as the ambitious programme
of quantified objectives and the strategic results
framework annexed to it. It is fundamental that the
Security Council not only dedicates efforts to thematic
debates and continues to strengthen the regulatory
framework on women and peace and security, but also
that it mainstreams the issue in all its work and
decisions.

In addition, my delegation once again welcomes
the work of UN-Women and its Executive Director,
Michelle Bachelet, in that area. We hope that, by
continuing the fruitful cooperation already under way
with other departments, agencies and programmes of
the system, that entity has the central place that it
merits in addressing the issue. For that, it can count on
my country's full support.

My country drew up an action plan on women,
peace and security in 2007, which it has since updated
twice. The effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions requires a
significant cooperation effort, with the participation of
six ministries, as well as constant and fluid contacts
with civil society organizations, involved throughout
the process, including the practical implementation of
concrete actions. An action programme on women and
peacebuilding, applicable to post-conflict situations in
a cross-cutting way, is also included in the master plan
for Spanish cooperation, in the context of the strategy
on gender and development.

Regarding specific recent actions, allow me to
highlight the first version of an international course on
a gender comprehensive approach to operations,
organized by the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation and of Defence of my country, in
cooperation with their counterpart departments of the
Government of the Netherlands, and held from 14 to
18 June in Madrid. The course focuses on implementing
the international community's appeals, specifically
resolution 1960 (2010), and also the recommendations
of the NATO Lisbon Summit, to invest greater efforts
in the training of civil and military employees on
gender issues. Through practical exercises, it focuses
on the integration of the gender perspective in civilian
and military peacekeeping operations in various kinds
of conflicts. Professional academic, military and
civilian speakers of the United Nations, NATO and
European Union took part in the course.

In the same spirit of cooperation between the
Administration and civil society, we are already
working on new training activities that are largely
inspired by the recommendations of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General. Those activities will
be collected in the third revision of the Spanish action
plan, whose drafting is already under way.

The international community must continue to
strive in pursuit of peace and security, and should make
use of the capacities of women as agents of change.
This year, the Nobel Committee recognized the efforts
of women who fought, in different areas, to achieve
peace - proof of the added value of their work and of
the importance of continuing such an effort, for which
the cooperation of my Government can always be
counted on.

