Mrs. Tripathi (India): My delegation would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate. We thank all the briefers for sharing their
experiences and insights.

Let me begin by condemning the serial blasts in Sri
Lanka and extending our deepest condolences to the
families of the victims, the Government and the people
of Sri Lanka.

Despite commendable advances both in policy and
practice in combating sexual violence, a gap between
what is recommended and the reality in the field
remains. We need to better understand the dynamic
complexities that manifest as sexual violence in armed
conflict in order to prevent the atrocities, end the culture
of impunity and rehabilitate and reintegrate survivors.

Our experience of appalling atrocities perpetrated
with impunity against women by the armed forces of a
State in our immediate neighbourhood in 1971 remains
vivid. The scars from these wounds are yet to heal.
The call for justice has reverberated at the high-level
general debate annually by a strong woman leader
who remains steadfast in reminding the international
community of the sexual violence committed against
women of her country. The perpetrators of these crimes
are now masquerading as champions ofjustice in order
to cover their mistakes.

We would like to make the following five points on
today's theme of discussion.

First, a robust framework for accountability
against sexual violence in armed conflicts must seek to
include all actors, irrespective of their affiliations and
motivations. The conceptualization of sexual violence
primarily as a tactic of war has become pervasive. It is
based on historical evidence and we not are disputing
the assertion, yet restricting our understanding to the
notion of instrumentality of sexual Violence in armed
conflicts runs the risk of rendering the other victims of
such atrocities invisible. These invisible victims could
include boys and men or those violated by civilians
and humanitarian actors with other motivations. The
framework for accountability and reparation must
address their suffering.
Secondly, a fragmented conceptualization of
sexual violence in armed conflicts often leads to the
decoupling ofthe issue from its sociocultural, economic
and political contexts. Interventions based on limited
considerations typically attempt to treat the symptoms,
rather than the underlying ailment. Our understanding
of the nexus between terrorism, trafficking and
sexual violence must inform action in this regard.
The Council must push for greater cooperation on
countering terrorism and the effective implementation
of sanctions regimes.

Thirdly, the United Nations must prioritize support
to national Governments to adopt stronger legal,
administrative and justice systems for protecting
the rights of victims, prosecuting perpetrators and
addressing the long-term consequences of abuses
towards the individual, the family and the community.

Fourthly, the greater participation of women in
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconciliation
processes needs to be promoted to address deep-
rooted inequality and subordination in society.
Treating victims, their families and communities
as mere beneficiaries of humanitarian assistance
disempowers them. Strengthening the role of locally
led civil society organizations is therefore pivotal to
sustainable solutions.

Fifthly, mainstreaming the gender perspective in
peace operations and increasing women's representation
in peacekeeping are prerequisites for prevention and
response. In this regard, India welcomes the uniformed
gender-parity strategy to increase the number of
women peacekeepers and is ready to deploy a female
engagement team to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and a women formed police unit to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan this year.

To conclude, improving the Security Council's
response to sexual violence in armed conflicts cannot
be pursued in isolation. The normative work done
outside the Council regarding equal rights and the
empowerment of women must continue to inform
our discussions.

