Mr. Wetland (Norway): Thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing us to speak.

What a difference a year can make! Eight years
after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Security Council was still debating whether sexual
violence was an issue of relevance to peace and
security. Then came resolution 1820 (2008), which
made it abundantly clear that where women are not
secure, there is no security. Still, the international
community was for too long somewhat ambivalent and
indecisive with regard to implementation and action on
the ground - until last week.

Today, the Council has adopted an important
resolution, but let me also congratulate it on the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1888 (2009), with its
comprehensive yet concrete recommendations for
action. This is truly a piece of work the Council can be
proud of.

What happened was leadership. In the past few
months, we have seen how men - and, even more,
women - in high and powerful positions have taken a
decision to make the fight against sexual violence in
armed conflict their top priority. Two lessons are clear
from this. First, where there is political will, there is a
way, and, secondly, women in power positions can
make a difference for the better.

One year before the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the time has now
come for the Council and the international community
to show the same resolve on other remaining challenges
in the promotion of women and peace and security.
Women must be recognized not only as victims of war
and peace beneficiaries, but most importantly as peace
and security providers. We therefore welcome this open
debate to set the course for the next 12 months, a course
not littered with re-commitments and repeated regrets,
but one that spells out specific results to be achieved
and to be measured by October 2010.

We support the Secretary-General's call for the
Council to urgently establish a monitoring mechanism
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Such
a mechanism must have clear indicators and
benchmarks, including with regard to women's
participation at all levels of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, post-conflict negotiations and
mediation. Measuring financial investments and
gender-sensitive funding provisions is also crucial in
this regard.

However, while such monitoring is needed and
welcome, the fundamental facts are already well
known. Women are underrepresented, women's needs
are underfunded and gender-sensitive expertise is
lacking, both in the field and in capitals. As the United
Nations Development Fund for Women points out in its
excellent study of post-conflict needs assessments, a
mere 2 per cent of signatories to peace agreements are
women, while less than 8 per cent of post-conflict
budgets specifically mention women's needs.

This must change, and Norway stands ready to
continue our contribution. This year alone, we have
allocated more than $50 million specifically for
women's empowerment, of which the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) is a key component.
Implementing our own national action plan since early
2006, we have identified a number of lessons learned.
Key among these is the recognition of the need to
address traditional impediments, including male
chauvinism, and to take proactive political and
financial measures to involve women directly, both in
formal governance structures and in cooperation with
civil society. We have established a dedicated gender
task force in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs to
mainstream these concerns in all aspects of our foreign
policy, including the follow-up to resolution 1325
(2000).

Such an approach is equally relevant to the
United Nations system. We appreciate the Secretary-
General's dedication to gender equality and women's
empowerment and would encourage him to confirm his
leadership on this issue, both in ensuring the
establishment of the new composite gender entity
agreed by the General Assembly last month and in his
appointment of special representatives and special
envoys. The appointment of a gender adviser in the
Department of Political Affairs would also be most
welcome.

