Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to commend you, Madam President, for convening
this meeting. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and Under-Secretary-General Michelle
Bachelet for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador
Lazarous Kapambwe and Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat for
their remarks.

The commemoration of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) last year resulted in a number
of renewed commitments and achievements on the part
of Member States in implementing that resolution and
others on women and peace and security. This year has
also seen numerous actions within the United Nations
and by Member States in joint efforts to implement the
resolution and advance women's participation in peace
and security, with particular emphasis on preventive
diplomacy, mediation efforts, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding.

We welcome the report before us (S/2011/598*).
The analysis of indicators it contains should provide
valuable benchmarks for further planning and act as a
road map. We also welcome the creation of the
strategic results framework as an important tool for
advancing implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and all other relevant resolutions on women and peace
and security. Its main objectives include increasing
consistency in decision-making processes among
different United Nations bodies within their respective
mandates and in capacity-building and cooperation
with Member States, regional organizations and other
partners, such as civil society.
Since the creation of UN-Women, greater
coordination and coherence in policy and programming
for women and girls are evident. We therefore consider
that briefings of the Under-Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women should continue so
as to facilitate a concerted and coordinated United
Nations approach.

Conflict and post-conflict situations often bring
violence and deprivation of rights. Addressing conflict-
related or sexual and gender-based violence, and
combating various abuses of women and girls' rights,
is an integral part of the women and peace and security
agenda. In that context, we emphasize the importance
of bringing those responsible for crimes against women
and girls to justice. A range of existing legal and
reconciliation mechanisms should be used at the
national or international level, while support for
national institutions and institutional reforms must be
an integral part of this process.

Ensuring that women are represented and
participate in decision-making forums, institutions and
mechanisms concerned with preventing and resolving
conflict and with peacebuilding; that they are included
in peace agreement negotiations and implementation;
and that enabling conditions for women peacemakers
and peacekeepers are created requires clear guidelines
and support on the part of the United Nations and
national authorities. Member States and regional and
subregional organizations should invest more in
strengthening the capacity of women's organizations.
Such organizations should be provided with support for
their conflict-prevention and resolution efforts and
consulted more on local women's peace initiatives.

We believe that countries should work on
adopting national action plans or strategies in order to
integrate issues of woman and peace and security, and
gender issues, into their national policies and create a
broader basis for implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In that regard, it is also important to increase
State institutions and services' knowledge and capacity
in order to implement the resolution and collaborate
effectively with international organizations and civil
society. Here, I recall that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
adopted both a national action plan for the resolution's
implementation and a gender action plan. Those two
documents are crucial to streamlining activities related
to the woman and peace and security agenda in
relevant sectors and to accelerating the resolution's
implementation in our country.
We firmly believe that women should be involved
in the policymaking and post-conflict planning and
programming processes. It is also important to increase
the number of gender experts on the roster.
Furthermore, the various implementation gaps should
be addressed more systematically, including through
improved coordination and accountability for results.
Clarity, comparability and consistency are necessary in
order to monitor the impact of various efforts on
women's empowerment and their rights.

The role of the United Nations is to support
Member States in this multifaceted process. It is
important to create useful guidelines adapted to
specific country situations, and to support the
development of activities related to women and peace
and security in the context of existing international
obligations, rooted in national legislation.

The use of indicators can contribute to the
efficient and effective monitoring and reporting of
results and data collection and to identifying gaps or
obstacles during this process in a coordinated manner.
This is particularly important when we consider that
successful implementation depends on the ability to
clearly and distinctly measure the progress of our joint
endeavours in the area of women and peace and
security.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly believes
that there can be no lasting peace and security without
the full participation of women in every aspect and at
every stage of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well
as in conflict-prevention activities. We therefore
remain committed to expanding our support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), other
relevant resolutions, and future efforts of the Security
Council on this issue.

