Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, for having organized this
debate and for your able leadership during your
presidency. I should also like to thank the Secretary-
General and the Deputy Secretary-General for their
participation today, and Executive Director Bachelet
and President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ambassador Kapambwe for their informative briefings.
I welcome to the Council Orzala Ashraf Nemat from
the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security, and thank her for her helpful remarks on the
progress made and challenges faced by women in
conflict situations. The United States also
wholeheartedly welcomes the Secretary-General's
report (S/2011/598*).

The awarding of this year's Nobel Peace Prize to
Liberian President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, Yemeni
activist Tawakkul Karman and Liberian peace activist
Leymah Roberta Gbowee is recognition of the role that
women can play in helping to resolve conflicts. All
three women are excellent examples of the difference
that women can make when given the opportunity to
make decisions about the future of their countries.
They have had significant impact on their societies,
and we congratulate them.

Over the past several years, the United Nations
and its Member States have taken important steps to
increase women's participation in issues related to
peace and security. We established UN-Women and the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Through the
Council's work, we have defined what we expect of
parties to conflict with respect to the protection of
women, and we have established a framework to track
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Many
States, including my country, are developing national
action plans to guide their engagement on issues of
women, peace and security.

But all this is just a beginning. We must ensure
that norms and institutional frameworks are turned into
action. What counts now is implementation and
delivering results.

The Secretary-General's report provides
examples of both real progress and the challenges
ahead of us. We welcome the initiative undertaken by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs to include gender
components, advisers and focal points on this issue in
all field missions. We are pleased that a gender and
mediation specialist has been appointed to the United
Nations Standby Team of Mediation Experts to ensure
that women's concerns are addressed in conflict
prevention and resolution, and not just towards the end
of a conflict, as is often the case. And we are
encouraged that a growing number of reports to the
Security Council, as well as mission mandate renewal
resolutions, address issues related to women in conflict
and post-conflict situations.

However, as the Secretary-General notes, "mere
reference to women and peace and security resolutions
is not enough" (S/20]]/598*, para. 74 (a)). We must
give United Nations entities strong support to
implement and deliver results for gender equality.
More can be done to ensure that the personnel of
United Nations missions are adequately prepared to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and support it in
their efforts. Both predeployment training and mission-
wide strategies on the protection of civilians, including
the needs of vulnerable groups such as women and
girls, need to be improved.
Gaps also remain in ensuring that those serving in
United Nations missions are held accountable for their
performance, particularly in the case sexual
exploitation and abuse. As the Secretary-General
acknowledges, the United Nations still lacks a system
that enables complaints of sexual exploitation and
abuse to be reported safely. The United Nations needs
to lead by example by actively enforcing the zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations peacekeepers. Conflict-related sexual
violence must be addressed from the very start in peace
processes, and more women should be included as
mediators and members of negotiating teams.

The United States is developing a national action
plan to accelerate the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) across our Government and with partners
in civil society. The plan will be centred on the four
pillars of resolution 1325 (2000): participation,
prevention, protection, and relief and recovery.

In the participation pillar, the United States has
supported the inclusion of Afghan women in the High
Peace Council and in follow-on shuras and
negotiations in the reintegration and reconciliation
process at the local level. We have also awarded
$16.9 million in direct grants to Afghan women-
focused non-governmental organizations.

In the protection pillar, the United States has
contributed roughly $2 million to the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We have provided
numerous courses to foreign militaries on human
rights, the prevention of gender-based violence and
sexual exploitation, and the protection of civilians.

In the prevention pillar, the United States has
developed multiple programmes that seek to address
the root causes of conflict, including a $26-million
annual reconciliation programme that supports
innovative programming in conflict-affected countries,
and includes gender analysis.

In the relief and recovery pillar, the United States
has provided significant funding to improve water and
sanitation in situations in which women's safety and
security are at risk. Our ultimate objective is to fully
incorporate women and girls into our diplomatic,
security and development efforts - not simply as
beneficiaries, but as agents of peace, reconciliation,
development, growth and stability.
As we move forward on our national action plan,
we are cognizant that, as Secretary Clinton said at a
Council debate on this issue last year,

"ultimately, we measure our progress by the
improvement in the daily lives of people around
the world. That must be our cause, and
empowering women to contribute all their talents
to this cause is our calling" (S.PV.64]], p. 15).

All of us now face the critical challenge of
turning our commitments on women, peace and
security into results. We believe that, through our work
here in the Council and our national efforts, we can
meet this challenge together.

