Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU). The Candidate
Countries Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and Croatia, the
Countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro, and the EFTA
country Iceland, member of the European Economic
Area, align themselves with this statement.

We are here to discuss the plight and the might of
women in conflict. Four years ago, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which dealt,
for the first time and in a comprehensive manner, with
issues relating to women, peace and security. We all
know that the resolution has had a tremendous impact
outside the United Nations. The Secretary-General's
report that is before us today (S/2004/814) concludes
that the resolution has been effectively utilized by civil
society organizations as an advocacy and monitoring
tool. And indeed, this landmark resolution has created
quite a constituency. Many non-governmental
organizations, not in the least women's organizations,
worldwide, have adopted resolution 1325 (2000) as
their own.
The shadow report on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), presented by the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
reflects this commitment.

But, how much of an impact has resolution 1325
(2000) had inside this building? Have the United
Nations system and the United Nations Member States
been equally enthused? I quote from the Secretary-
General's report: "Despite significant achievements,
major gaps and challenges remain in all areas".

Women's participation in conflict prevention and
peace processes doesn't seem to be taking off.
Integration of a gender perspective in peace
agreements must still be improved. And the
representation of women in decision-making positions
remains the exception rather than the rule.

Why? Why do we, in this day and age, still have
to call specific attention to the fact that the world's
population is made up of women as much as of men?
Why does it not come naturally to us to take gender
concerns to heart? When we look at our own
Organization here, out of 191 Member States, there are
only 11 female Permanent Representatives. Twenty-
two of my colleagues from the European Union, about
25 countries, are not women - they are men. Does this
explain why only a few Security Council resolutions
pay attention to gender concerns? Is it lack of
understanding? Is it lack of political will? I believe it
might be both, and I believe that resolution 1325
(2000) teaches us an important lesson in this respect.

Undoubtedly, awareness of the importance of
adopting a gender perspective in peacekeeping has
increased significantly following the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). Our understanding of the
subject has grown. Training at all levels - ranging
from troop contributors to members of the Security
Council - has contributed to that cause. Recently the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations issued a
gender resources package, which is an impressive piece
of work and for which we would like to commend
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno.

Most peacekeeping missions have appointed
gender advisers, and 10 out of 17 missions now have
such a full-time position. That is all valuable progress.
However, unless we demand accountability at the same
time, such efforts will not bear maximum fruit. In our
career paths, gender has never been a critical success
factor. Therefore, it is important to build on the
foundation that 1325 (2000) has laid.
In his report, the Secretary-General expresses his
intention to develop a comprehensive, systemwide
strategy and action plan, with particular emphasis on
monitoring and reporting mechanisms. The European
Union expresses its hope that such a systemwide
approach, which encompasses all United Nations
bodies and includes clear time frames, will lead to
accountability. Resolution 1325 (2000) is not a
resolution that can be dealt with separately, once a
year. Each report presented to the Council and each
resolution adopted by the Council should contain a
gender perspective. In fact, it is essential that a gender
perspective be incorporated from the earliest stages on,
both at Headquarters and at the field level, including in
the planning of new operations.

Finally, commitments made must be met by
adequate resources. Performance indicators, in this
respect, are invaluable. We call on the Security Council
to consider how best to keep track of its own record in
integrating resolution 1325 (2000) into its daily work,
including through the possible designation of a focal
point for monitoring implementation.

On the issue of gender-based violence, we
listened carefully to the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Louise Arbour, when she stated
that violence against women was a particularly grave
human rights Violation. Many women and girls bear
witness to the fact that in conflict situations, civilized
behaviour may cease. Violence against women,
including rape and sexual slavery, is often used as a
weapon of war in order to dehumanize women
themselves or the community they belong to. We have
seen recent examples of such horrendous acts in
Darfur, in the Sudan. We know of similar appalling
acts of violence against women and girls in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In Myanmar, we
see patterns of systematic violations of the human
rights of women, including sexual violence, by the
regime's armed forces. The European Union condemns
such practices in the strongest terms. Under all
circumstances, States must take all necessary measures
to prevent violence, protect women and girls from
violence, and promote the full enjoyment of their
human rights.

Impunity should be a dead-end street. The
European Union welcomes the fact that provisions
sanctioning systematic and large-scale sexual and
gender-based violence have been incorporated in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court as
war crimes and crimes against humanity. The European
Union wholeheartedly agrees with the Secretary-
General that international and national courts should
have adequate resources, access to gender expertise,
gender training for all staff, gender-sensitive
programmes for victims and witness protection in order
to more effectively prosecute those responsible for
such crimes. A recent conference on gender justice
organized by the United Nations Development Fund
for Women (UNIFEM) and the International Legal
Assistance Consortium provided compelling evidence
for this.

Finally, the United Nations system, as well as
troop-contributing countries, should obviously be part
of the solution, not the problem. Under no
circumstances can gender-based violence be condoned
in peacekeeping or in other United Nations-led
operations. International missions should not
contribute to the existence or spread of sexual
exploitation. The development and follow-up of codes
of conduct are important. We note in this regard the
Secretary-General's Bulletin on protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse. The European Union
insists on a zero-tolerance response, by which it means
the prosecution and punishment of perpetrators. We
welcome the strong action taken by the United Nations
humanitarian organizations when violations have
occurred in recent years.

There is only one long-term solution to gender-
based violence: gender equality. As we look forward to
the discussions to be held at the 2005 comprehensive
review of all the commitments contained in the
Millennium Declaration, including peace and security
and development, we should keep this firmly in mind.
As we commemorate today the fourth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we also take
note of the fact that exactly 25 years have passed since
the 1979 adoption by the General Assembly of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). As stated
in the preamble of the CEDAW Convention, the full
and complete development of a country, the welfare of
the world and the cause of peace require the maximum
participation of women on equal terms with men in all
fields. Resolution 1325 (2000) reminds us daily of our
solemn obligation to achieve gender equality.

