Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago welcomes yet another opportunity to
participate in the discussion on the important subject
of women and peace and security, and we commend
the Council for its organization of this forum. We also
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on the issue (S/2012/732),
as well as to the Executive Director of UN-Women
and to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations for their informative briefings and to the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security for her presentation this morning.

Trinidad and Tobago is fully committed to the
achievement of the goal of gender equality and the
empowerment of women. In that context, we are agree
strongly on the need to strengthen efforts to ensure that
women are equally represented in all spheres, including
at all levels of decision-making processes in the field of
peace and security, given the important and valuable
contributions that women have made and can continue
to make to conflict resolution and peacebuilding
initiatives.

As a State that subscribes to the rule of law in the
promotion and maintenance of peace and security,
as well as in the empowerment and advancement of
women, Trinidad and Tobago has implemented in its
domestic legal system its obligations under the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and the 1977 additional Protocols
to the Geneva Conventions, in addition to other
fundamental instruments, including the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Notwithstanding the importance of the
implementation of the provisions of important legal
instruments and agreements on peace and security,
Trinidad and Tobago is also of the view that the
prosecution of those accused of committing crimes
against women and girls during armed conflict is a
critical factor in achieving lasting peace. We believe
that any failure to prosecute the perpetrators of grave
crimes against women and girls would not only
contribute to the culture of impunity, but would be at
variance with resolution 1325 (2000). Consequently,
as a founding member of the International Criminal
Court, Trinidad and Tobago has given domestic legal
effect to the Rome Statute, which established the Court,
and encourages others to adhere to the instrument.

Trinidad and Tobago comes from a region that has
become a significant casualty in the diversion of small
arms and light weapons, which has led to an increase in
armed violence in our country. That places a tremendous
burden on women in our society - economically,
socially and psychologically - as they are forced to
cope with the numerous consequences. The Prime
Minister of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago has
therefore formulated a number of initiatives to address
the problem. However, since the problem involves
the entire international community, we believe that a
systematic approach is required to appropriately address
the challenges posed by the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. The problem clearly requires a
coordinated international response. In that regard,
Trinidad and Tobago, a strong advocate for a robust
and legally binding arms trade treaty, was disappointed
by the failure of the United Nations to adopt such a
text earlier this year. Nevertheless, we remain hopeful
that Member States can reach agreement on that
fundamental instrument and that it will be successfully
adopted at the United Nations Conference on the Arms
Trade Treaty to be held in March 2013.

Trinidad and Tobago agrees that the full, equal
and effective participation of women is critical to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions, as well as to the implementation of the
future arms trade treaty. Their participation would
also be especially relevant, in as much as the Treaty
relates to the prevention of the transfer of conventional
weapons, which are likely to be used in the commission
of gender-based violence against women and girls.

In an effort to create greater awareness of the
important role of women in matters relating to
peace and security in general and those relating to
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control in
particular, Trinidad and Tobago successfully hosted,
at the margins of the high-level segment of the sixty-
seventh session of the General Assembly this year, a
ministerial panel discussion on women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control. The event witnessed
the participation of Government ministers and other
Government officials, the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs and representatives of civil
society. The event was also marked by the adoption
of a ministerial declaration on women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control.
Additionally, efforts have been undertaken during
this session of the General Assembly to strengthen
draft resolution A/C.1/67/L.35/Rev.1 on the subject
of women, disarmament, non-proliferation and arms
control, which was first piloted by Trinidad and Tobago
in the First Committee in 2010. The draft resolution
was again adopted by consensus during this session
of the First Committee, with a notable increase in
sponsorship. That further demonstrated that States
continue to recognize that there cannot be sustainable
peace and security without the full, effective and equal
participation of women.

Trinidad and Tobago also commends and supports
the significant role of United Nations agencies and
bodies in gender-mainstreaming initiatives and in
providing information about the ways in which women
have contributed and can continue to contribute to
peace in our societies. UN-Women, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean have done a
significant amount of work in that area, and we look
forward to their continued efforts in that regard.

Trinidad and Tobago remains committed to working
with other Member States, as well as its partners at
the regional, hemispheric and international levels, to
provide an environment that promotes the involvement
of women as equal partners in matters related to peace
and security, including at all levels of decision-making
processes.

