Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement to us this morning.
I would also like to extend a special greeting to Under-
Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet, who joins us
today for the first time in her capacity as head of
UN Women. We are delighted at her appointment and
pledge our full support to her.

I welcome the contributions of several ministers
and high-level officials. I also recognize the presence
of Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. I
am grateful to Ambassador Hamidon Ali, to Under-
Secretary-General Alain Le Roy and to Ms. Thelma
Awori for their remarks.

Since its adoption 10 years ago, resolution 1325
(2000) has sparked a revolution of ideas. It has placed
the role of women as agents of peace at the forefront of
the multilateral agenda. It has made the case for the
appointment of women to positions of decision-making
related to peace and security. It has galvanized civil
society and transformed the way it interacts with the
Council. It has helped us to understand the importance
of women in peacekeeping missions and induced many
Governments to deploy more female troops and police
officers and, in some cases, all-female units.

Yet much remains to be done. Sexual violence
continues to be used as a weapon of war, and
peacekeeping missions still struggle to protect women.
The participation by women and the representation of
women still represent small fractions of what those
rates should be. But, at least today we have a much
better understanding of the challenges we face and the
goals we must meet. This is no small achievement and
it should be celebrated and built upon.

In the discussions of ways to enhance
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the role of
indicators has become a focus of our attention.
Indicators are an important tool to improve information
on the impact of armed conflict on women and on the
role they can play in peacebuilding. They will enable
us to respond more effectively and improve our action
in protecting women and involving them in peace
processes. Brazil welcomes such efforts and will
closely follow the Secretariat's endeavours to render
them operational.

Like much of resolution 1325 (2000), most of the
indicators apply only to countries in conflict or
emerging from it. Nevertheless, some indicators have a
much wider applicability, such as the ones pertaining to
United Nations field missions or investigation of
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeepers. This gives the set of indicators a truly
global character. In this context we note with
appreciation the wide-ranging consultations undertaken
by the Secretariat with regional groups while preparing
the indicators.

Valuable as they may be, indicators are not
enough. They are but a means to an end. We must work
harder to effect concrete changes through action. It is
important to increase engagement by the Governments
concerned. National action plans are important vehicles
in this regard, especially if they also involve a broad
range of actors, including civil society. It is also
important that action plans be supported by adequate
funding.

If women's concerns and needs in conflict
situations are to be properly addressed and if women
are to play an equal part in maintaining peace, they
must be politically and economically empowered.
Representation at all levels of decision-making and
access to economic opportunities are key in this regard.
In post-conflict situations, where institutions are rebuilt
and gradually consolidated, there is often a window of
opportunity to surmount historical gender inequalities.
In that context, it is essential that constitutional,
political and educational reform processes, as well as
programmes aimed at economic revitalization, give
special attention to the role of women.

Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are important
ways by which the United Nations can strengthen the
role of women as agents of peace; so much so that
empowering women and protecting their rights should
not be the exclusive task of gender advisers in
peacekeeping operations, but rather a responsibility
shared by all mission components. Mission-wide

strategies, encompassing United Nations country-teams
and other actors whenever possible, can develop
protection plans, ensure that the voices of women are
heard, facilitate women's participation in peace
negotiations, foster women's leadership and
organization, and promote capacity-building that will
support women's empowerment. We commend the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for the
progress it has made in this regard and welcome the
suggestions just offered by Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy to further strengthen women's role in
peacekeeping.

In my own country there has been compelling
evidence that, when women are empowered, they can
act successfully to change their lives and the lives of
those around them. Under "Bolsa Familia", a
conditional cash transfer programme that has lifted
millions of Brazilians out of poverty, women are the
preferred recipients of transfers. As a result, their
bargaining power in family relations has increased, and
their influence has become stronger on issues such as
family planning, education of children and use of the
family's income. Although Brazil's reality differs
greatly from those of post-conflict countries, we feel
that our experience validates a principle that is
essential to the promotion of women's role in such
societies.

That is why we are actively seeking to ensure that
women and their needs are taken into account in our
cooperation with post-conflict countries. Two examples
come to mind, both regarding Haiti: our collaboration
with the United Nations Population Fund and with
OXFAM. to support the implementation of Haiti's
National Plan for the Prevention of Violence Against
Women, through capacity-building and awareness-
raising; and our support to establish a trades and
services vocational training centre, which will have
programmes especially geared towards women.
In conclusion, resolution 1325 (2000) has enabled
us to gain a better understanding and appreciation of
the transformative role women can play in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We must strive to ensure that
its goals are fully realized.

