Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would first like to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking up this very important topic
today. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
very powerful statements.

Past experience demonstrates that women's
effective participation and influence in the peace
process are closely linked to sustaining peace.
However, we must admit the reality of women's poor
representation in major peace processes and the lack
of progress in their participation. As we approach
2020 and the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), we need more vigorous efforts on the part of all
actors in the international community if we are to fully
implement the normative framework.

Japan attaches great importance to supporting
women's participation and protecting their rights in
the area of peace and security, as one of the three core
pillars of our efforts to create a society where women
shine. Today I would like to share two examples of what
we are doing in that area. First, Japan supports the UN-
Women project in Kenya designed to promote women's
substantial participation at the community level. In the
past year, more than 8,000 Kenyan civilian women and
female police officers have been given prevention and
response training for combating violent radicalization,
with an additional 1,000 women and young people
receiving income-generating skills training. The
project encourages women to be confident, active
players in protecting their communities from violent-
extremist influences.

Secondly, Japan has been helping to strengthen the
capacity and representation of female police officers in
Afghanistan, who have increased their knowledge and
skills relating to the provision of effective protection
and support to women who have experienced violence.
Their strong motivation in working for peace and
security encourages other women, including the
survivors of violence. Japan believes that the leadership
of women in the area of peace and security is key to
realizing sustaining peace.

In order to promote women's political and economic
empowerment and their meaningful participation
in sustaining peace, Japan intends to strengthen
cooperation in multilateral fields, especially in the
following aspects. First, sexual violence in conflict is
a major obstacle to sustaining peace, and commitments
are necessary from both donor and conflict-affected
Governments. Japan is one of the top donors to the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict through
contributions totalling $9.5 million, and we have seen
substantial results from those efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We reiterate our ongoing
support for its work.

Secondly, Japan is proud to support the Women's
Leadership, Empowerment, Access and Protection in
Crisis Response programme, also known as LEAP, under
the UN-Women's Flagship Programming Initiatives.
In that regard, Japan has contributed $8.7 million in
2018 to promote women's resilience. Thirdly, Japan has
designated Sri Lanka as a partnership country under
the Women, Peace and Security Partnership Initiative
of the Group of Seven, based on our historically
excellent bilateral relationship. We would like to
expand our assistance targeted towards the meaningful
involvement of conflict-affected women in order to
promote the women and peace and security agenda in
Sri Lanka.

Before concluding, I would like to mention that
Japan will host the World Assembly for Women in
Tokyo on 23 and 24 March 2019. Women and peace and
security will be one of the main topics of discussion.
We are looking forward to welcoming guests and
participants from all over the world.

