Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me also begin by
thanking Germany for convening today's open debate
on women in peacekeeping - an integral tool for
achieving some of the priorities under the women and
peace and security agenda. I also wish to convey our
appreciation to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
and the other briefers for their insightful briefings
delivered earlier today.

Beginning with resolution 1325 (2000) there have
so far been eight Security Council resolutions that
have articulated and moved forward the woman and
peace and security agenda. Even as the international
community has come together to collectively condemn
acts of unimaginable horror, sexual abuse of women
and girls has continued to be used as a tactic of war in
conflicts across the world, including in my own region.
As one of the world's leading troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), Pakistan has set the highest standards
in fulfilling peacekeeping mandates, including the
protection of vulnerable segments of the population,
especially women and children, from violence. We have
always advocated integrating the gender perspective into
the peacebuilding paradigm, with a View to promoting
comprehensive, inclusive and sustainable peace.

Female peacekeepers from my country have already
made a mark and have shown themselves, alongside
their male counterparts, to be competent, dedicated and
professional. An outstanding example was Shahzadi
Gulfam, the first-ever recipient of the United Nations
International Female Police Peacekeeper Award in
2011. We are proud of her service, as indeed those of all
our peacekeepers.

To share our experience and promote best practices
in peacekeeping, we have established the Centre for
International Peace and Stability in Islamabad, which
offers specially designed modules to help peacekeepers
respond effectively and protect innocent civilians
from sexual violence. During the recently held United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial, we also offered a
course for female military observers at the Centre for
International Peace and Stability. During her visit to
Pakistan earlier this year, the President of the General
Assembly, Ms. Maria Fernanda Espinosa, visited the
Centre for International Peace and Stability to interact
with and learn more about the experiences of female
peacekeepers. That led to a rich discussion of ways to
inspire more women to join peacekeeping missions.

As a major TCC, let me make five specific points.

First, we believe that the increased participation of
female peacekeepers and encouraging more women to
take up mediation roles helps in the stabilization and
reconstruction phases of conflicts. Pakistan, for its
part, will be deploying a female engagement team in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo later this year. We
also recently achieved the goal of ensuring that 15 per
cent of staff officers deployed in peacekeeping missions
are female, thereby fulfilling our responsibilities in
accordance with the uniformed gender-parity strategy,
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and Security
Council resolutions.

Secondly, incentivizing the participation of women
in peacekeeping missions merits serious consideration.
That might include additional allowances, shorter
rotation cycles, better-suited medical facilities, better
accommodation and improved communication with the
families that they have left behind to serve the cause
of peace.

Thirdly, increasing the deployment of female
peacekeepers alone cannot realistically meet the
requirements of the women and peace and security
agenda. It is national Governments that bear the
primary responsibility for women's safety and rights.
The international community should support States in
that regard, including by strengthening the capacity of
their national institutions.

Fourthly, Pakistan fully supports the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse. Pakistan was among the first group of
countries to sign the Secretary-General's voluntary
compact on the subject, and the Prime Minister of
Pakistan also joined the Secretary-General's Circle of
Leadership last year.

Fifthly, female peacekeepers must feel safe in their
environments. Any slack in ensuring their safety would
also affect the United Nations credibility and ability to
deliver. A zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse must also be implemented in letter and spirit
to accompany the progressive deployment of female
peacekeepers, as envisaged by the United Nations.

Let me conclude by saying that, for my country,
protecting the vulnerable, including women and
children, is not only a global peace and security
imperative but also our solemn obligation. We remain
resolute and steadfast in honouring our commitments
in that regard.

