Mr. Garcia Gonzalez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): El Salvador welcomes your initiative,
Mr. President, to convene this open debate of the
Security Council on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.

That resolution constitutes a cornerstone in the
efforts to achieve full participation - on an equal
basis - of women in all initiatives for peace and
security, together with the integration of the gender
perspective in the context of seeking a resolution of
armed conflicts, in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and in post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation.

Resolutions 1325 (2000), 1888 (2009) and 1889
(2009) constitute important policy instruments, since
they make it possible to consider, in a broad,
comprehensive fashion, the increasing complexities of
conflict and post-conflict transitions to development
situations from a gender perspective.

El Salvador recognizes that, 11 years after its
adoption, progress has been achieved in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as pointed
out by the second report (S/2012/33) of the Secretary-
General. The report clearly indicates the importance of
making the women's peace and security component
universal and cross-cutting, and not only from the
perspective of the Security Council, but also from that
of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and its subsidiary bodies, and in particular, the
Peacebuilding Commission, as appropriate.
The Secretariat has increased and given greater
weight to reports covering women's issues. But, in our
judgment, a consistent lack of information still exists
regarding countries and specific situations of women in
respect to this issue.

It is important to note that communication and
information between field missions and Headquarters
should be open and immediate in order to make it
possible to update data. Furthermore, to the degree that
the gender perspective is entrenched in the context of
armed conflicts, associated problems come to light,
such as the lack of prevention and protection against
abuse and all kinds of violence against women and
girls, including sexual violence, as was eloquently
indicated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General at this meeting.

In that regard, El Salvador agrees with other
delegations and civil society organizations that the
Secretary-General should be asked to include more
systematically in all his reports on conflict situations
broad information on acts of sexual violence and other
gender-based acts against women and girls.

El Salvador recognizes the progress that has been
made with regard to the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, as many of them now include an express
mandate on women, peace and security, as is the case
of Libya, South Sudan, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone,
Darfur, Burundi, Haiti and Afghanistan.

El Salvador also recognizes and encourages the
important role that can continue to be played in the
future by United Nations Women, which has a special
mandate to deal with this issue in a broad,
comprehensive fashion.

To conclude, allow me to reiterate the
Government of El Salvador's political will to continue
making progress in promoting and implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as in strengthening the
political participation of women in decision-making
processes and in all areas affecting their lives.

