Mr. Cohen (United States ofAmerica): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's open
debate, and the Secretary-General for his briefing and
strong commitment to supporting women's meaningful
participation with regard to issue of peace and security.
I also thank the Executive Director of UN-Women and
the Ministers of the Netherlands and Sweden for their
important contributions to today's discussion.

The United States is committed to exercising
leadership in terms of implementing the global women
and peace and security agenda. The effort requires
action from Member States and the United Nations
itself. Today I would like to discuss how we are working
to advance women's participation in peacemaking
and security issues, as well as how we are furthering
women's economic empowerment. Promoting women's
equal and meaningful inclusion and participation across
efforts to restore security, promote democracy and good
governance and support economic development are not
women's issues. They are vital national security issues.

This month we celebrated one year since the
United States became the first country to translate
this agenda into a comprehensive national law with the
passage of the Women, Peace, and Security Act of 2017.
A cornerstone of implementation of that landmark
legislation will be the development of bold new
strategies on women, peace and security, anchored in
the United States' national security strategy and long-
standing commitment to women's empowerment. That
historic milestone reaffirms the United States' long-
standing belief that the meaningful participation of
women is at the heart of efforts to promote security and
to advance peace. Our renewed commitment to women
and peace and security aims to ensure that women's
voices are at the centre of efforts to secure peace.

Our legislation also provides an opportunity to
renew efforts to bring women from all backgrounds
to the peace table. Our experience shows that women
often have the best understanding of the needs of
their communities. In one example, our Government
collaborated with Notre Dame's Kroc Institute to
monitor the implementation of the Colombian peace
accord, including its inclusivity and gender provisions.
The parties to the accord used Kroc's data to guide
strategic decision-making at the national and territorial
levels. The United States has also identified Yemeni
women experienced in conflict resolution, security
and policing, and is encouraging the United Nations
Special Envoy for Yemen and UN-Women to expand
female involvement in the peace process and conflict-
resolution efforts there.

While the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/900) points to progress in the United Nations
system and at the regional and national levels, there is
much more work to do. Translating the women and peace
and security agenda into action requires long-term
commitment. At the United Nations, we continue to call
for the integration of the tenets of the women and peace
and security agenda across all operations, which will
enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of our work.
Through efforts like the Security Council's Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, we
are better integrating gender analysis into the Council's
discussions and decisions. The women and peace and
security agenda is now in more peacekeeping mandates
than ever before. However, it is only when that agenda
is a priority task in mandates, as is the case with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that we really
start to see the issue treated as the priority that it is and
should be.

We encourage United Nations leadership here in
New York and through the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General in the field to take the lead on
the women and peace and security agenda, empowering
gender advisers and facilitators to support their work.
It is up to leadership to drive the culture change that we
need to deliver results we want to see. We know that
the best ideas on the women and peace and security
agenda often come from outside the Secretariat, outside
the Council and outside ministries and capitals. That is
why it is essential that we fight efforts to limit the space
for civil society and bring outside voices in, particularly
women's voices, to inform and drive our work here.

From women civil-society leaders to human rights
defenders, to peace negotiators, the work women do
is essential, often dangerous, and we should look to
leverage their successes. We also continue to call on
and support more Governments taking leadership on
this critical issue. The United States strongly supports
the design and implementation of national action plans
on women and peace and security worldwide. In Iraq
and Afghanistan, we have supported civil-society
monitoring and advocacy initiatives related to national
action plans. We are also working with the African
Union to strengthen its capacity to review, monitor
and implement national action plans on the continent.
Finally, we have provided support to develop national
action plans in Eastern Europe and Central Asia.

But the women and peace and security agenda is
about more than peace; it is also about security. The
United States believes strongly that countries with high
rates of gender inequality are more likely to experience
instability and deadly conflict. The meaningful
participation of women at all levels of security work,
including in uniform, can help counteract that worrying
trend. When women serve as military members, they
make the security sector more representative of the
population. They help security forces understand the
communities in which they operate, serve their needs
and earn their trust. Women's leadership in the security
sector also reinforces the importance of women's
participation in every aspect of society and opens up
opportunities for other women. While we support those
efforts in our own armed forces, we are also working
with Governments around the world to support them in
bringing the skills, leadership and untapped potential
of women into their security forces. That focus on
the substantive inclusion of women is particularly
important in United Nations peacekeeping.

Turning to women's economic empowerment, the
United States is working to build communities that are
more resilient to conflict. We have invested $50 million
in the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative,
an innovative multi-donor facility that is aimed at
expanding access to finance and technical assistance
for women entrepreneurs. Fourteen other Governments
have already joined us since we launched this initiative
at the Group of Twenty summit last year. Together we
have committed more than $340 million to the fund and
leveraged more than $1.6 billion from public and private
sectors to support women entrepreneurs in developing
countries. It has unlocked the multi-trillion-dollar
investment opportunity that women's economic
participation truly represents.

Empowering women economically starts with
ensuring that girls have access to education. That is a
complicated issue, but I want to highlight one particular
area: the attacks on schools and their misuse in armed
conflict. Girls suffer most when there are attacks on
schools or when combatants misuse schools to support
combat operations. Even when the fighting ends,
parents are particularly wary of sending their daughters
to school where there is a risk of violence. Girls are
also less likely to return to education once conflict has
interrupted schooling. Terrorists, with their disregard
for the welfare of civilians, are among the worst abusers,
as we have seen with Hamas, among others. That is why
the United States strongly supported language in this
year's renewal of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy condemning the use of civilians to
shield military objectives from attack, including when
terrorists are using schools or other civilian facilities to
advance their violent aims.

If we hope to prevent conflicts and build lasting
peace, promote better governance and advance
sustainable economic growth, we must empower
women as full and equal partners at every step. Women
are half the population. It is only right that they be full
participants in the discussions and decisions that shape
our present and those that will shape our futures.

