Ms. Kanchanalak (Thailand): It is an honour for
Thailand to speak, as the current Chair of the Human
Security Network, on behalf of Austria, Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama,
Switzerland, Slovenia, South Africa as an observer, and
my own country, Thailand. I would like to thank Spain
for organizing this important debate and all speakers
for their valuable input into today's deliberations.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
world has experienced a rapid increase in conflicts,
violent extremism and humanitarian crises whose
effects have fallen heavily on women and children.
The involvement of women continues all too often to
lag behind that of men in peace and security issues,
particularly in political and decision-making processes,
and women are also the target of sexual and gender-
based violence. Women have a great stake in peace
processes and conflict prevention, since they still suffer
the most painful wounds in any given conflict, whether
or not they were participants in the conflict itself. The
positive role of women in the processes of conflict
prevention and resolution is often ignored rather than
utilized.

As a group of countries promoting human security,
the Human Security Network would like to emphasize
that women's security is essential for human security.
The Network welcomes the Secretary-General's request
for a global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and will carefully study its findings and
recommendations. The Network calls upon Member
States, United Nations entities and regional and
subregional organizations to support Member States in
their efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000). The
Network also calls for greater efforts to promote, protect
and respect the human rights of women and girls and
to strengthen efforts to address gender-based violence
through a people-centred approach. Specifically, that
can be done by ensuring and implementing strategies
that protect women's integrity, by promoting women's
representation at all decision-making levels and
through mechanisms for the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.

Effective measures and immediate actions
should be taken to end impunity and to prosecute and
punish those responsible for the violation of human
rights, especially for crimes against women and girls
in conflict. We find it crucial to include a gender-
responsive approach and to strengthen efforts aimed at
providing life-saving and non-discriminatory response
services. Civil society, including grass-roots women's
organizations and networks, play an important role in
providing assistance to the victims and survivors of
sexual violence.

The empowerment and participation of women
is essential to any conflict prevention and protection
response. As such, strategies for the effective integration
of a gender perspective should be pursued, so as to
promote women's empowerment and participation. The
importance of women's participation in peace processes
as well as in peacekeeping operations was underlined in
resolution 1325 (2000). We call for greater recognition
and support for their participation during all stages
of conflict resolution and post-conflict reconciliation
processes, so that peace agreements can be reached and
will be more likely to last.

In my national capacity, allow me briefly to impress
upon the Council a few important points.

Much too often, we focus on the view of women
and girls as victims of violence. In fact, however, they
are also effective agents of change who contribute to
peace processes at all stages, including to rebuilding
their societies after conflict. That is already evident,
but imagine if they were supported to do more.
Imagine if they were given more opportunities to
participate in processes that have a direct impact upon
them. As Member States, we can help to give them
that opportunity. Member States can do more to help
women and girls make a real difference by promoting
women's participation in peace processes in concrete
terms. That also means investing in women's capacity
to lead, mediate and play a pivotal role in peace and
security.

In the past few months, Thai Government agencies
have undertaken the rigorous process of drafting a
national action plan on women and peace and security.
A draft of that plan is currently undergoing a public-
hearing process. We have conducted one large public
hearing in the capital, and a few more will be conducted
in the provinces, so as to ensure that our national action
plan is relevant and beneficial and gains local support
and awareness, and that it will be effective. We hope
that, in just a few months' time, this draft will be able
to undergo the final approval process and will be duly
launched.

Another area that we feel requires immediate
attention is data collection and building a body of
evidence to keep the international community abreast
and thereby strengthen their good efforts in promoting
the role of women in peace and security globally.

Lastly, I would also like to associate Thailand's
statement with the statement of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations to be delivered by Viet Nam.

