Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): I wish to
thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, Mr. Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General
of Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Beyani, Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, and the representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Allami,
for their briefings. We also welcome the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/2l earlier today.

The role of women in peace and security and the
specific impact of the lack of peace and security on
women have only recently attracted consistent attention
from the highest international decision-making
bodies. Yet the progress made is very significant.
Such progress has led to a better comprehension
of the sources of conflict, as well as of the paths
towards peace and reconstruction. It has also led to the
orientation of resources towards a deeper knowledge
of the consequences of conflicts and better institution-
and capacity-building with regard to the role and the
empowerment of women.

Turning to the matter at hand, I would like to
congratulate Argentina, and the Security Council at
large, on the choice of the subject for today's open
debate. It is a subject of cruel pertinence. This year,
we have reached the highest number of refugees and
internally displaced persons since the Second World
War. Unfortunately, we must expect the situation
to worsen before it improves. New reasons to expect
further displacement are emerging at an alarming
rate. State and non-State sponsored violence, often
tinged with religious extremism, targets civilians,
in particular women and girls. Disease generates
panic and the disruption of economic and social
networks and is itself fanned by further displacement,
misinformation and fear. The short- and long-
term impact of mass displacement requires no
further description. Nonetheless, it requires mutual
cooperation and concerted action by all stakeholders.
However unprecedented and unconventional today's
conflicts may appear, they nevertheless have well-
known, traditional and destructive effects on the
civilian population, in particular those at the greatest
risk: women and girls.

Portugal is encouraged by several very positive
developments as regards women and peace and security,
such as the fact that this issue is a consistent feature
in Security Council resolutions and peacekeeping
mandates, as well as the fact that gender-sensitive
reporting is now understood as a fundamental element
for a thorough understanding of a given situation. We
are proud to have worked towards such mainstreaming,
together with many partners within the Security
Council during our recent mandate on the Council,
as well as with the wider membership of the United
Nations, thereby fulfilling pledges assumed before our
election to this body. A very special word of thanks and
encouragement must also go to the non-governmental
organizations and civil society community, which
has been of invaluable support and generosity in its
advocacy.

At the multilateral, regional and national levels, we
should also welcome the fact that organizations such
as the African Union and NATO have named special
envoys for women and peace and security and that an
increasing number of countries have developed national
action plans to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and its
successors. It is now necessary to sustain and develop
the progress already achieved. The Security Council,
as well as the entire United Nations system, must
maintain its commitment to that agenda. In that regard,
Portugal welcomes the expanding focus on sexual
violence in conflict. Sexual violence is a scourge that
affects directly and indirectly generations of victims of
conflict.

Our work on this matter strengthens the broader
women and peace and security agenda and underlines
the need to further empower women politically and
economically. The year 2015 will provide a unique
political opportunity for the advancement of the women
and peace and security agenda. The high-level review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
global study requested in resolution 2122 (2013), as well
as the celebrations of Beijing+20 and the discussions
of the post-2015 development agenda, will all take
place. All of us will have a renewed chance to make our
policies on that matter more tangible.
Let me conclude with a specific call to action by
drawing the Council's attention to the goal that the
High Commissioner for Refugees has set: to eliminate
statelessness worldwide by 2024. Statelessness is widely
recognized as a source of injustice, discrimination,
marginalization and life-long stigma for millions of
individuals. It perpetuates the tragic effects of conflict,
forced displacement and migration. The discrimination
against women in nationality laws is a widespread and
grave source of statelessness. Women are particularly
victimized in that instance not only because of gender-
based discrimination but also because they can be
perceived as the source of discrimination from which
their children and extended families suffer, often with
pervasive, devastating effects. It is high time that the
matter be addressed at the highest level with a view to
its complete eradication.

I take this opportunity to call on all countries that
have not yet done so to accede to or ratify the 1954
Convention relating to Stateless Persons and the 1961
Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, the
key legal instruments and fundamental elements for
the prevention of international conflicts and for the
mitigation of their effects.

