Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank the
German presidency for organizing this important open
debate, and the briefers for their comprehensive insights.

Nineteen years ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000), calling for enhanced
efforts by the international community to increase
the participation of women in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping operations. As the Secretary-General
stated two weeks ago at the opening ofthe Peacekeeping
Ministerial, women play an essential role in improving
the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions, as well
as their engagement with local communities. Women
are often the first victims in conflicts and wars, being
more vulnerable to physical and sexual violence, but
often they are also the first to advocate for peace. When
women are on the front line ofpeacekeeping operations
and are part of peacebuilding teams, they function as
a catalyst for trust and cooperation, thereby enhancing
the ability of the United Nations to fulfil its mandates
for peace and security.

Since the establishment of the State of Israel,
women have been an integral part of our country's
defence forces. Initially, only a few positions were
open to women. However, throughout the years their
opportunities were expanded through Israel Defence
Forces (IDF) reform, as well as individual pioneers
who fought for equality within the military. One such
pioneer was Alice Miller, whose attempt to become
an IDF pilot was denied based on her gender. Miller's
appeal to the Supreme Court in 1995 brought about
the acceptance of woman into the air force academy.
A few years later, the IDF appointed the first women's
affairs adviser to the Chief of Staff. That was born out
of the recognition that the IDF would not be able to
reach its full potential without ensuring a supportive
and inclusive environment for women to serve in.

In the past decade, we have witnessed how changes
within the system to accommodate women have helped
us advance towards gender parity. Today over 85 per
cent of positions in the IDF are open to women, and
more than 30 per cent of IDF officers are female. Of all
the women serving in the IDF, 20 per cent hold officer
positions, while of all the men serving only 10 per cent
are officers. We may not have achieved full gender
parity yet, but we are well on our way and efforts
are ongoing.

We all agree that there is a need for more women
in United Nations peacekeeping, and Israel is pleased
to see that the seeds planted 19 years ago by resolution
1325 (2000) are starting to grow. More women are
taking on key managerial roles in the United Nations,
and the number of women in peacekeeping has doubled.
However, despite those achievements, as was mentioned
in the Peacekeeping Ministerial, we still have a long
way to go.

We commend the Secretary-General for his
leadership on gender parity thus far and recognize
that the United Nations is making tremendous strides.
However, in our view, there is an essential component
missing in order to encourage the full inclusion of
women in peacekeeping settings: the adjustment
of the environment and facilities in field missions.
It is not enough to simply set targets. If we want
more women to serve in the field, we must create an
inclusive environment by ensuring their safety within
United Nations compounds and providing them with
the facilities and services necessary, such as on-base
women's health services, accommodation for families
and more. Our continued focus should be on increasing
the number of women in key positions throughout the
Organization by adjusting the working conditions and
services available to accommodate them.

If we are to encourage women to serve in
peacekeeping, the United Nations and its States
Members must endeavour to create a more welcoming
and inclusive environment in the field. The United
Nations will be able to reach its full potential only
when both halves of the world's population are involved
and contributing.
