Ms. Vassiliadou: I thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Mr. Yury Fedotov; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura; the civilian activist for
Yazidi women's rights, Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan; and
the Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors
of Human Trafficking, Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha,
for their briefings.

I speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization

and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

We would like to congratulate Spain on convening
this open ministerial debate, as well as to commend its
keen commitment to addressing trafficking in human
beings in conflict throughout its mandate as a member
of the Security Council. This may mark the end of
Spain's term, but it also marks a beginning in this area.
We must build on the momentum.

Trafficking in human beings is a threat to human
and national security, peace, human rights, democratic
governance, the rule of law and socioeconomic
development. Trafficking in human beings is a grave
violation of human dignity, specifically prohibited
under article 5 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the European Union. It is also a form of serious
transnational organized crime, with huge human social
and economic costs. It is driven by the demand for all
forms of exploitation and by very high profits, in both
legal and illegal economies, resulting in a complex
interplay between supply and demand that must be
addressed if the crime is to be eradicated.

We remain strongly committed to eradicating
trafficking in human beings, which requires a
transnational response. The United Nations provides
an excellent forum for that. The European Union has
placed multilateralism at the core of its new Global
Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy. We stand
behind the commitments in the New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants to combat human trafficking.

We welcome the reports of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/36land S/2016/36l/Rev.l) and on the implementation
of measures to counter trafficking in persons
(S/2016/949). We especially note the nexus between
conflict- and post-conflict-related sexual violence
and human trafficking. In that context, trafficking
takes many despicable forms, from sexual slavery to
labour exploitation or organ removal. The list is long
and gruesome. We are concerned by the references to
armed groups that regard the civilian population as a
resource to be exploited, viewing women's sexuality
and fertility as commodities to be trafficked and traded
as part of the political economy of war.

Importantly, trafficking is gender-specific.
The most recent EU data show that trafficking for
the purpose of sexual exploitation is still the most
widespread form and that the majority of its victims
are women and girls. In that respect, we call for a more
gender-specific, targeted approach in all actions against
trafficking.

It is clear that we must focus on the prevention
of trafficking in human beings in all its forms. Any
other approach will come too late for the victims, as
we have heard today. In that connection, ensuring
accountability for the perpetrators is essential. We
cannot accept a culture of impunity. By cracking down
on the profits generated, we can strike a decisive blow.
In order to do so, we must follow the financial trails
and use all available investigative tools to prosecute the
perpetrators and bring them to justice.

By upholding and promoting international
standards, as enshrined in the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocols, in the Convention on the Elimination
of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and
other international legal instruments, we contribute to
ensuring strong foundations for the rule of law. We are
working closely with UNODC in that respect via joint
programmes. One such action is the joint European
Union-UNODC Global Action to Prevent and Address
Trafficking in Persons and the Smuggling of Migrants,
launched in January in partnership with the International
Organization for Migration and UNICEF, as mentioned
in the report (S/2016/949) of the Secretary-General.

We remain committed to the implementation of
the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, as defined in the Secretary-
General's Bulletin (ST/SGB/2003/13) on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse.

While recognizing that we are faced with human
displacement on the largest scale in human history,
we acknowledge that the issue of human mobility goes
beyond any one crisis. We live in a world of 7 billion
people, with demographic imbalances and growing
inequalities.

TheEuropeanUnionishonouringitsresponsibilities.
Since 2015, our vessels have saved thousands of people
in the Mediterranean Sea. Thanks to a mandate from
the Security Council, Operation Sophia is disrupting
traffickers' and smugglers' networks.

It is well known that Da'esh uses sexual violence
systematically to fund its operations. That includes
kidnapping for ransom and the sale of women and
girls through human trafficking and slave markets. We
recognize that instability creates an ideal environment
for the criminal activities of traffickers. We are therefore
actively supporting all efforts led by the United Nations
to bring an end to the political and security crises in Syria
and Libya. We need to strengthen our comprehensive
policies and strategies aimed at empowering the role of
women in society, and better understand their specific
needs and their role in the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism. Measures need to be taken in order
to prevent and address the use of new technologies as
tools for recruiting victims of trafficking, including in
conflict areas and by terrorist groups.

We emphasize the significant advancement in
international justice made by the International Criminal
Court, as well as by non-permanent international
criminal tribunals, in combating sexual violence
in conflict. Nevertheless, we bear in mind that the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court is
complementary to the jurisdiction of States and that
the primary responsibility for bringing perpetrators
to justice resides with States. At the national level,
accountability and transitional justice mechanisms are
also key.

The EU has built an ambitious, gender-specific
and comprehensive legal and policy framework to
combat trafficking in human beings. Anti-trafficking
actions also form a key part of our external policies and
funding. The EU will continue to develop partnerships
to address trafficking in human beings.

There is a market for trafficked human merchandise.
We need to put an end to traffickers' impunity.
Effectively preventing this heinous crime necessitates
reducing the demand and incentives for the trafficking
of human beings. Accountability and collective efforts
are needed to put an end to this terrible crime.

A full version of my statement has been submitted
to the Secretariat.

