Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
thank the President for having convened this important
debate and also to thank Secretary of State Rice for
presiding over this morning's debate on such a pressing
issue. I also thank you, Mr. President, for your
leadership during this month of June. My delegation
wishes to thank the Secretary-General, the Deputy
Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly for their statements, and especially the
former Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of

08-3908]
the Congo for sharing insights from his personal
experience and helping us to better understand the
challenges before us.

Eight years ago, the Council adopted landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), which, for the first time,
addressed the impact of war on women. Israel
continues to support the full implementation of this
resolution. While progress has been made in some
aspects, much more work needs to be done. One aspect
in particular, which is the basis of today's debate, calls
on parties to armed conflict to take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual abuse, and
emphasizes the responsibility of States to put an end to
impunity.

While sexual violence in armed conflict has
occurred throughout history, brutal and systematic rape
has become increasingly commonplace in some
conflict and post-conflict areas. Moreover, sexual
violence as a weapon of war is now perpetuated with
almost universal impunity in some conflicts. Such
actions not only constitute gross violations of human
rights, but they also undermine confidence in peace
processes and raise huge barriers to reconciliation.

While the international community has
recognized that sexual violence can amount to a war
crime, crimes against humanity, or constitutive acts
with respect to genocide, numerous challenges remain
with respect to ending sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict.

One particular obstacle is victims' reluctance to
come forward. Survivors and victims of sexual and
gender-based violence often feel ostracized, as they are
forced to assume guilt and shame. This silence not only
harms the victims and their families, but also leads to
faulty statistics. Sources in the field confirm that,
indeed, the number of incidents of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict is greatly underreported.
Hence victims must be empowered to reclaim their
human dignity. States should enforce the rule of law,
bring the perpetrators to justice and end the cycle of
impunity.

Similarly, a change in societal attitudes and
norms regarding sexual Violence must be effected,
beginning with, as I just mentioned, the bringing of
perpetrators to justice. Ending impunity will also
encourage victims to come forward to seek justice and
rehabilitation. At the same time, we must educate the
world's children, at the earliest stages of life, on the
rights, dignity and worth of every human being,
without regard to their gender.

At the recent Wilton Park conference,
recommendations were made that sexual violence be
viewed as a security issue and that the international
community should identify the circumstances under
which sexual violence is a threat to national and
international peace and security. In this context, the
Council can play a greater role in ensuring that
peacekeeping mandates specifically refer to the
prevention of sexual violence, that peacekeepers are
appropriately trained and informed about sexual
violence and that sanctions and other tools are used
against perpetrators. In this regard, my delegation fully
supports the Secretary-General's call for peacekeepers
to be part of the solution and not part of the problem.

Indeed, resolution 1804 (2008) of 13 March
2008, which imposed a travel ban and asset freeze on
individuals in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who commit serious violations of international law,
including sexual violence against children, is a good
example of how the Council can act more effectively.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reported more than 32,000 registered cases of
rape and other forms of sexual violence in the province
of South Kivu, Democratic People's Republic of the
Congo, alone.

Lastly, we must consider the effects of sexual
violence not only on the victims, but also on the
children born of mass rape, sexual slavery and sexual
exploitation. The impact of armed conflict on children
born of rape and exploitation has economic, health and
social implications that must be addressed.

Sexual violence is not an inevitable outcome of
conflict. It can be stopped. States, regional bodies, non-
governmental organizations and even individuals all
have specific roles to play in seeing that an end is put
to this detestable practice.

The Council, in particular, can focus on reporting
on sexual violence and seek to fully implement
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In that context, my delegation welcomes and
is pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution currently
before the Council. For its part, Israel pledges to
continue to fully implement resolution 1325 (2000) and
to work to promote women's rights in all of its political
and development work. Doing so, in concert with
global efforts, will help to build and sustain an
international commitment to prevent and respond to
sexual violence in conflict situations.

