Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to join previous speakers in
commending the President's initiative in convening
today's important meeting.

Over the past 20 years, the international community
has been proactively combating conflict-related sexual
violence. The Security Council has achieved significant
normative progress with the adoption of key resolutions,
including resolution 2331 (2016). Moreover, since 2010,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict has efficiently coordinated
international endeavours on the part of various bodies.
It is also noteworthy that women's protection advisors
deployed to peacekeeping and political missions have
proven to be helpful in enhancing the effectiveness of
monitoring and early warning on the ground.

Despite this important progress, however, the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/249) shows
that deplorable sexual violence continues to occur in
conflicts and post-conflict situations. Moreover, the
rise of violent extremism, as well as mass migration
and the ongoing refugee crisis, adds to the gravity
and complexity of this problem. Taking all of this into
consideration, I would like to highlight the following
four points.

First, prevention must be prioritized. It is well
known that extremist groups, such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab
are among the most egregious perpetrators that
weaponize sexual violence for strategic gain and
ideological dissemination. Therefore, it is fair to say
that the eradication of extremist groups should be
the first task in preventing grave sexual violence in
conflict. Furthermore, given that sexual violence and
exploitation are used to sustain these groups via both
recruitment and revenue, we must spare no effort
to eradicate terrorism as mandated by the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

In the long term, special attention should be
drawn to the Global Citizenship Education initiative.
Tolerance and mutual understanding of a range of
differences and diversity, including ethnicity, religion
and others, can be a fundamental solution to preventing
violent extremism at its roots. The prevention of sexual
violence in conflict is also in line with the priority
that the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has placed
on the role of women and youth in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. As the Chair of the PBC this year,
I will make efforts to ensure that this issue be duly
reflected in the PBC's work on women and youth.

Secondly, we need to end the culture of impunity.
We often witness a lack of willingness and capacity of
individual countries to hold perpetrators accountable.
In this regard, I would like to commend the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict for its efforts to strengthen institutional
safeguards against impunity at the national level. This
is especially important as a lack of safeguards within
national borders can often snowball into transnational
issues in our deeply interconnected world. A case in
point is the increased sexual violence and systematic
trafficking in persons along migration and arms routes
in the Mediterranean. In addition, when a particular
country fails to hold perpetrators accountable, the
international community should employ all available
means to address sexual violence in conflict, including
referrals to the International Criminal Court, as
recommended in the aforementioned report of the
Secretary-General.

Thirdly, we have to stick to a survivor-centric
approach towards victims. Priority should be given to
helping the socioeconomic reintegration of victims by
providing them with sustainable assistance, including
medical, psychological, legal and other multisectoral
services. And we also need to scale up attention paid
to the risk of survivors being twice traumatized. If
survivors are not fully accepted and reintegrated
into communities and, instead suffer stigma, shame
and suspicion, they have a much higher chance of
being further marginalized or even susceptible to
radicalization efforts.

Fourthly, we need to enhance the capacity of
Governments to respond to sexual violence in conflict.
Given that fragile and conflict-affected States often
lack the capacity to address this crime, they need to be
supported by the international community to build their
own national capacities.

The Republic of Korea, for its part, has continued
to take concrete initiatives to contribute to building
the capacities of Governments, as well as of women
and girls, in fragile and conflict-affected States. In
particular, we have carried out official development
assistance projects aimed at supporting the
empowerment of women and gender equality. In 2015,
we launched the Better Life for Girls initiative, which
employs a gender-focused approach to empower girls
in developing countries. We have also continuously
supported gender-sensitive peacebuilding projects
of various international organizations, such as
UN-Women's Building Back Better project and the
work of the United Nations Development Programme
on gender and human rights.

Before closing, I would like to reiterate that the
Republic of Korea is committed to working closely
with the international community in order to eradicate
sexual violence in conflict around the globe.

