The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Rwanda.

It is a great honour for me to be here today and
to preside over this important open debate on women
and peace and security, and sexual violence in conflict.
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict forjoining us today.

I also welcome the presence of the Vice-Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, the First
Lady and Ministerial Secretary for Social Inclusion
of El Salvador, as well as Ms. Saran Keita Diakite,
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.

Rwanda commends the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
for bringing renewed focus to the fight for the protection
of women.
We welcome the Secretary-General's recent report
on sexual violence (S/2013/149), as well as the efforts
undertaken by the Special Representative, notably
during her visits to the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia, to
engage leaders and other stakeholders on that most
important subject.

We hope that the Secretary-General's report will
enhance the coordination and effectiveness of the global
response to the problem of sexual violence. Besides
addressing specific challenges facing women and girls
in conflict zones, such an approach must incorporate
broader peace and security imperatives. Critically, we
envisage that it will lead to more effective monitoring
of the commitments made by Member States to prevent
sexual violence, where possible, and to address its
consequences, where necessary.

In conflict settings and, more specifically, those
driven by genocide ideology, as my country experienced
in 1994, rape and sexual assault are used to punish,
humiliate and dehumanize victims, their families and
communities. Far from being random acts of brutality,
the systematic sexual victimization of women and girls
in conflict settings is now well understood as a crime
against humanity that demands the urgent attention of
the world.

Let me touch on the experience of my country with
the intent to offer hope to women victimized by conflict.
My country's strong stand on violence against women
emanates from the high value it places on women and
girls, as well as our national resolution to never again
see the cruelty directed to Rwandan women during
the 1994 genocide. On a national level and beyond our
borders, we take this issue extremely seriously.

Just 19 years ago, Rwandan women were forced to
endure inhuman and degrading atrocities. Many were
raped and left for dead. Among those who survived,
many were infected with incurable diseases; some
were made pregnant; many suffered the humiliation of
having been abused in front of their families. And yet,
the women of Rwanda refused to be defined or defeated
by their ordeals. They raised their heads, declining to
become permanent victims or objects of pity. They
sought justice. They demanded dignity. Inasmuch as
Rwanda has been able to reconcile and recover from the
events of 1994, it is because of that unshakeable spirit
of defiance, found foremost among its women and girls.

The use of sexual violence in that fashion was
exported from Rwanda to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo when genocidal forces escaped into the
eastern part of that country, after July 1994. Tragically,
that behaviour has been adopted by a plethora of armed
groups that operate in the region. As a result, the
incidence of such crimes has grown rapidly in recent
years. But we must not accept such atrocities as a fact
of life. The international community must redouble
its efforts to combat the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda, along with those who fund and
support them, wherever they are.

It is a broken society that fails to protect its
most vulnerable citizens from sexual violence. The
proliferation of such violence is a sure sign of State
failure. As such, any society hoping to move beyond
crisis and conflict cannot hope to do so until it has
corrected its course with respect to the treatment
and prevention of sexual violence. Indeed, Rwanda's
experience leads us to believe that healing and
reconciliation are possible only when women claim
their rightful place at the heart of our communities.
The Government of Rwanda therefore welcomes this
opportunity to express our unequivocal condemnation
of all forms of violence against women and girls,
particularly in conflict situations.

Impunity breeds and rewards criminality and
violence. Only by insisting on justice and by fighting
impunity has Rwanda been able to achieve meaningful
reconciliation within our borders. The eradication
of sexual violence in conflict will not be possible as
long as perpetrators are able to escape accountability
for their actions. We have come to understand first-
hand the importance of strengthening internal justice
mechanisms and of building institutions that enhance
the accessibility of justice. Rwanda therefore calls
upon all Member States to enforce accountability,
as well as to desist from harbouring the perpetrators
of humanitarian and human rights violations, which
shields them from the consequences of their crimes.

Rwanda has adopted a range of policies to prevent
and respond to violence against women and girls,
and I will touch on only some of those in a moment.
First, however, it is important to stress that, as we
recoiled from the horrors visited upon our women,
the Government and people of Rwanda have worked
assiduously to instil a culture of respect within the
military and the police force, among boys and girls in
the classroom and within families and communities.
That has prompted a profound shift in attitude among
Rwandans of all ages and walks of life.

Specific policy responses to the problem of sexual
violence include the establishment of one-stop centres,
which offer a wide range of services for the victims of
gender-based violence. Those centres bring together the
relevant Government agencies, as well as community
leaders and civil society, to provide integrated support
for victims. That approach of offering comprehensive
medical, psychosocial, evidence-gathering and judicial
services in one place has been met with such success in
the past three years since it began that my Government
has committed to a significant expansion of the
programme over the next seven years.

In response to the Secretary-General's UNiTE
to End Violence against Women and Girls campaign,
initiated in 2010, Rwanda hosted an international
conference on the role of security organs in ending
violence against women and girls. The conference
endorsed a declaration and subsequently formed a
secretariat to monitor its implementation. With a
current membership of 16 countries and a permanent
secretariat, based in Kigali, members have developed
a standardized training manual to implement an all-
Africa command post exercise, code-named Africa
UNiTE.

In addition, Rwanda is the leading contributor
from Africa of female police and correctional officers
to United Nations peace support and peacekeeping
missions. Among other duties, those officers actively
contribute to combating and raising awareness about
violence against women. They also serve as advisers
on gender-based violence and share best practices with
officers and local authorities. All our peacekeepers
undergo specific training on respect for gender and
human rights prior to deployment.

Time does not permit me to outline all the initiatives
undertaken by my Government, but I note that Rwanda
adopted a national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2010 and is a party to the Kampala Declaration ofthe
First Ladies on Sexual and Gender-Based Violence of
the 2011 International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region.

As expressed during the discussion on the
prevention of conflict in Africa earlier this week (see S/PV.6946), Rwanda takes the firm View that lasting
peace and security, and therefore the safety of women
and girls, are possible only when nations, supported
by regional and international bodies, address the root
causes of conflict. The degradation of women and girls
as part of conflict is unacceptable in any form under
any circumstances. Its eradication must be a first-order
priority of the Council.

Rwanda urges all parties to armed conflict to
enforce a clear prohibition on sexual violence, expressed
through chains of command, via codes of conduct and
military field manuals and in constant training. We
further call upon those parties to ensure that alleged
abuses are investigated swiftly and perpetrators held
accountable.

Rwanda reminds civilian and military leaders
with command responsibilities that they, too, are
accountable for acts of sexual violence committed on
their watch. Rwanda will, on a case-by-case basis,
support the adoption or extension of targeted sanctions
against persistent perpetrators of rape and other forms
of sexual violence.

Rwanda supports calls to include provisions in all
peacekeeping mandates that specifically address the
prevention of and response to sexual violence. That
should include, where appropriate, the identification of
women's protection advisers, as the Secretary-General
urged earlier in his statement, alongside gender advisers
and human rights protection units.

Rwanda recommends that the problem of sexual
violence be addressed directly as part of any post-
conflict or peacebuilding process. That should
include United Nations-sponsored peace negotiations
and security sector reform processes or be part of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Whether through legislative reforms, awareness-raising
campaigns and the training of police, prosecutors,
judges and magistrates or the recruitment of more
women to such positions, we must insist that national
authorities take proactive steps to protect women and
girls. Due consideration should also be given to the
prosecution of sexual violence through transitional
justice arrangements. In Rwanda, the destigmatization
of sexual violence, which empowered victims and gave
them a voice, was a central element ofthe post-genocide
justice.

I cannot end without calling upon the international
community, non-governmental organizations, civil
society, faith-based organizations and other non-State
actors operating in affected areas to support the
genuine reporting and investigation of sexual crimes.
That is important to ensure that justice is served and
that survivors are able to begin the process of healing.
Above all, we call upon all parties to conflict that are
responsible for acts of sexual violence to cease such
violations.

It is time, in our view, for the world to move beyond
expressions of outrage and, instead, to make concrete
and measurable progress towards a world where the
bodies of women are no longer considered a battlefield.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
wish to inform all concerned that we will continue the
debate through the lunch hour, as we have a very large
number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representataive of
Norway.

