Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I should
like to thank you, Madam President, for organizing
this event and for your presence here today. Let me
also thank you for the expression of sympathy to the
American people. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-Moon and his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura, for their
briefings. I also thank Ms. Ke'ita Diakite for helping us
better understand how women in Mali are combatting
sexual violence. Women's civil society organizations
are making critical contributions in that area and need
our support.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/ 149). Tragically,
the report and today's briefings remind us that this
issue is a global problem. It is also complex and
multifaceted - from sexual violence used as a tool for
coercive population displacement to forced marriages
by armed groups and the challenges of the widespread
unreporting of abuse and the plight of children born out
of rape.

Today, I would like to draw attention to the need
for greater emphasis on prevention, including at
the communal level and within the United Nations
system, for engaging parties to conflict to address
sexual violence and for integrating sexual violence
prevention and response efforts into security andjustice
sector reform. At the community level, improving
the prevention of sexual Violence requires a better
understanding of existing protection mechanisms
and leveraging grass-roots networks that can provide
local information to inform prevention efforts. There
is progress in that area: for example, the community
policing centres run by displaced persons in camps in
Darfur and the enlistment of imams as advocates for
sexual violence prevention in South Darfur.

For United Nations missions, better prevention
involves equipping peacekeepers and civilian staff
with the guidance and expertise to respond to early
information about threats of large-scale abuses. The
training modules designed by the United Nations are
a positive step in that direction, as is the creation of a
United Nations international network of female police
peacekeepers, which links more than 1,000 United
Nations female police officers around the world to share
best practices and advocate and mentor female police.

Bringing deeper gender expertise to United Nations
field missions is essential for the enhanced prevention of
sexual violence. United Nations leadership in New York
and in the field should commit to a greater presence of
gender experts and women protection advisers in United
Nations missions. Furthermore, the deployment of such
experts should be routine in United Nations technical
assessment missions. We note a particular need for
that expertise in Libya to address the root causes of
sexual violence perpetrated during the conflict and
the resulting trauma. Encouraging parties to conflict
to discuss sexual violence within their ranks, although
challenging, is another critical avenue of prevention.
The agreements that Special Representative Bangura
brokered in the Central African Republic are models of
such engagement.

Changing the behaviour of armed parties requires
political will, as well as better monitoring and
reporting and, where appropriate, the credible threat
of consequences, such as naming and shaming and
sanctions. Furthermore, mediators and envoys should
routinely address conflict-related sexual violence in
their ceasefire and peace negotiations. But the spectrum
of action for countering sexual violence must not be
limited to a conflict and its conclusion. It must be
prioritized throughout the peace processes, including
in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
phase and in security sector reform. Rigorous vetting
should ensure that perpetrators and those who have
directed sexual violence are denied entry to the security
sector. There should be strong protection mechanisms
for civilians in close proximity of cantonment sites.

The best way to ensure such protection is for women
themselves to participate meaningfully in security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme design and implementation
and to have more women working and leading in the
security sector. It is clear that female survivors of
sexual violence are more likely to report to a female
police officer or a women's police station, as our
experience in Haiti has borne out. Women's civil society
organizations need greater capacity to monitor, inform
and provide security services in conjunction with law
enforcement authorities. We must also build reformed
national justice sectors and local institutions that can
hold accountable those responsible for sexual violence,
while international criminal justice mechanisms
continue to play their important role in ending impunity
for those crimes.

Last week, in its declaration on preventing sexual
violence in conflict, the Group of Eight reaffirmed
that rape and other forms of serious sexual violence in
armed conflict were war crimes and emphasized the
need to promote justice and accountability for such
crimes.

These issues are hardly theoretical. The scourge
of sexual violence persists. We are alarmed by the
horrific abuses occurring in Syria, including against
men and boys, and we affirm that those responsible for
violations of human rights will be held accountable. The
United States continues to support the documenting of
evidence of atrocities committed by all sides for use in
future Syrian-led transitional justice and accountability
processes.

Beyond Syria, the United States has proven its
commitment to prevent and address gender-based

violence around the world, providing more than
$100 billion in 2012 for those efforts.

In conclusion, I wish to commend the excellent
work that Special Representative Bangura and her staff
are doing. I urge the entire United Nations system to
give due attention to prevention efforts and facilitate
the deployment of necessary expertise to conflict
areas. The United States looks forward to continuing
collaboration with all those who seek to end the scourge
of sexual violence in conflict, including through a new
Council resolution to address outstanding challenges
on these issues.

