Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I should like to thank the
Plurinational State of Bolivia for organizing this
important debate, as well as for the concept note that
your delegation has prepared (see S/2018/904, annex).

I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. I also
thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah for their remarks.

Eighteen years have passed since resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted. Its adoption was a recognition of
the participation of women, whose contribution is very
significant to peacebuilding. Each year, the Council
has witnessed the relevance of resolution 1325 (2000),
which reminds us that without the safety of women and
girls, lasting peace cannot be achieved. It is precisely
through debates like the one that brings us together
today that we contribute added value to ensuring
the full implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

During our membership in the Council during the
2012-2013 biennium, Guatemala deemed it important
to discuss this issue, taking into account the fact that
violence against women in armed conflicts is a flagrant
violation of human rights that requires the appropriate
attention to prevent such abuses. During this debate,
we have broached strategies that would allow us to
diminish the tragic effects of armed conflicts on
women and girls, particularly - and sadly - murder,
systematic violations of their rights, sexual slavery and
forced pregnancies, among others.

Once again my delegation reiterates to the Council
the importance of the leadership and participation of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and peacebuilding. We believe that it is necessary
to increase women's representation at all levels of
decision-making in such institutions as national and
regional mechanisms set up for conflict prevention and
resolution and that, above all, it is important to examine
issues related to women's participation in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

We have witnessed that gender discrimination
remains an obstacle to women, and consequently is
also an obstacle to their overall human development.
Greater participation by women has a positive impact
on addressing some of the most urgent challenges of our
time, including migration, climate change and, indeed,
conflict prevention. In that regard, my delegation
wishes to reiterate that the proper implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) requires political will on the
part of all the competent bodies of States. Owing to
the importance that my country attaches to the proper
implementation and application of the resolution,
we actively participated in the two meetings of the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network, the
first having taken place in Alicante, Spain, in 2016,
and the other in Berlin, Germany, in April 2018. The
meetings made it possible to establish a platform for
the exchange of experiences and best practices at the
international level on the global women and peace and
security agenda. We are convinced that the strategic
alliances that have been generated within the Network
are of special importance to achieving the goal of a
world with inclusive peaceful societies that advocate
for protecting and strengthening women's rights in all
their aspects. We wish Namibia, which will host the
next meeting of Focal Points Network, a successful and
fruitful meeting.

Finally, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. To achieve that goal, it recognizes
the need for a set of mechanisms and instruments
applicable according to the situation and circumstances.
We therefore recognize that the magnitude and nature
of the challenge of sustaining peace calls for close
strategic and operational partnerships among the United
Nations, Governments and other key stakeholders with
a view to jointly achieving sustainable peace on the
ground. Accordingly, Guatemala reiterates its position
that, within the framework of international human
rights, in particular the obligations of States signatories
to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
provides a solid basis for sustaining peace, we as an
Organization are clear that the collective work of the
United Nations system to promote human rights should
help identify root causes and prevent conflict through
the greater participation by women.

