Mr. Ceylan (Turkey): At the outset, Mr. President,
allow us to congratulate the Rwandan presidency for
organizing today's important debate.

Turkey has aligned itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the observer of the European
Union. I shall therefore be very brief.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/l49)
and the statements made today make clear that, over
the past three and a half years, effective action has been
taken by the United Nations to prevent and address the
scourge ofsexual violence in conflict. We also note with
satisfaction the activities and initiatives undertaken
by UN-Women, including through the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence
against Women, to which Turkey is a contributor.

Despite those efforts, sexual violence in conflict
remains prevalent. Both the report of the Secretary-
General and the findings of the international
commission of inquiry indicate the occurrence of
serious cases of sexual violence in the course of the
conflict taking place just across our border with Syria.
In that regard, we welcome the intention of Special
Representative Bangura to visit Syria to investigate the
reports of abuses.

As of today, Turkey hosts more than 190,000
Syrians in 17 camps. There are another 100,000 who
have made their way to various Turkish cities and
towns. The massive flight of Syrians out of their
country is certainly because the Syrian regime does
not care about their safety and well-being. Therefore,
the groundless remarks made earlier today regarding
the camps in Turkey should be read through that
prism. The camps in Turkey have been Visited by
many international representatives and United Nations
dignitaries, including Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
I do not wish to repeat here yet again their comments
and praise. By attributing groundless allegations to
others, the perpetrators of the massive humanitarian
crisis in Syria are trying to divert attention from their
brutal and inhumane policies. That futile approach will
certainly not prevail.

