Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his statement, as well as to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women for her
valuable contribution.

The adoption on 31 October 2000 of resolution
1325 (2000) remains a significant milestone in the
progressive march for women' rights and equality the
world over, since it represents new progress in our
efforts to ensure for women a significant and necessary
voice in the area of peace and security.

South Africa strongly believes in the involvement
and empowerment of women in every aspect of
peace, security and development. That finds a robust
reflection in the fact that democratic South Africa has
one of the largest contingents of women peacekeepers
deployed throughout the African continent. Women's
participation in peacekeeping and peacemaking
efforts is recognized as a contributing factor to the
effectiveness and long-term success of United Nations
deployments. The recognition of the importance of
the role of women in the context of peace operations
is a strong incentive to building women's capacities
within the peacekeeping landscape. It also contributes
to the accessibility and credibility of United Nations
deployments in local communities.

In that regard, South Africa has been developing the
training programmes needed to equip our peacekeepers
to deal with the unique Circumstances that may develop
during peace operations. In 2015, the South African
Government, in partnership with UN-Women, launched
a training course tailored for female military officers
stationed at the South African Army School's Peace
Mission Training Centre in Pretoria. A second training
course, co-facilitated by South Africa and Kenya, will
take place in Kenya in November. The South African
Department of International Relations and Cooperation,
in collaboration with the Government of Norway, has
established an initiative for training and creating a
network of mediators, with the ultimate objective of
broadening the inclusion of women's mediation efforts
all over the world. UN-Women and the United Nations
Department of Political Affairs have also participated
in that training programme, and the African Union has
included it in its own work.

South Africa supports efforts to mainstream
women's involvement in peace and security, which can be
achieved through further coordination and cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations. That,
we believe, can help to formalize the training of women
mediators and ensure their effective mainstreaming
into United Nations peacebuilding efforts. South Africa
would like to encourage the United Nations to develop
a database of women mediators that could ensure their
meaningful participation in peacebuilding delegations.
That would be in addition to cooperation between
Member States on training courses designed to help
build women's capacities in various specialized areas
of the peace and security environment.

South Africa reaffirms its strong commitment to
the full and effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the subsequent related resolutions, as
ground-breaking commitments to the advancement of
the agenda on women and peace and security. Women
and girls continue to be disproportionately affected
by conflict situations, especially where sexual abuse
and violence are concerned. That reality underpins the
principles of resolution 1325 (2000), which addresses
sexual violence in conflict and forms an integral part
of the women and peace and security agenda. We stress
that Member States have a fundamental responsibility
to prosecute the perpetrators of human rights abuses,
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
those relating to sexual violence against women
and girls. My delegation would like to emphasize its
appreciation for the active role and full participation in
monitoring the implementation of those resolutions by
the Executive Director for UN-Women and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

Resolution 2242 (2015) gives further impetus to the
mandate established by resolution 1325 (2000). Over the
past year, we have seen greater engagement on the part
of the Council on matters relating to women and peace
and security, including through the work of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security. But
we believe that more can be done to implement the
recommendations of resolution 2242 (2015), including
by interacting with women on the ground who are
directly affected by conflict. The meeting, co-hosted
by UN-Women and Norway and held on the margins
of the general debate of the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session, which explored the impact of
violent extremism on women and children, was notable
in that regard.

In conclusion, South Africa looks forward to
further cooperation and to sharing experiences with
Member States, as well as with the Department of
Political Affairs, UN-Women and other partners. That
will enable us to improve our incorporation of gender
perspectives and the concerns of women and girls into
our efforts, with the goal of enhancing sustainable
peace and security in all conflict situations.

