Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I am
speaking on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, and Ms. Razia Sultana, who spoke on
behalfofcivil society and in particular the Rohingya, for
their briefings. We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for her leadership and dedication.
The European Union (EU) has been and will remain a
staunch supporter of her important mandate.

Conflict-related sexual violence, as well as all

forms of violence and discrimination against women,
girls, men and boys, are crimes and violations of human
rights. The European Union welcomes the report
submitted by the Secretary-General (S/2018/250). It
provides harrowing evidence of the occurrence of
sexual violence in conflict in numerous places around
the world.

While there is improved awareness of the prevalence
and hideousness of sexual violence in conflict and
normative progress has been achieved, including in
the Council through dedicated resolutions, countless
women, men, girls and boys still live under the constant
threat of sexual violence. Those living in areas plagued
by conflict and violent extremism have the most
to fear. Behind every statistic in the report - and
unfortunately, we know that underreporting continues
to be a challenge - we find a life and a person. Two
simple questions are posed: What are we, as the
international community, doing to put an end to that,
and what is needed that we are not yet doing?

The European Union has taken concrete action to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual Violence.
Our engagement to achieve gender equality, security,
sustaining peace and sustainable development is at the
core of our daily work. The European Union emphasizes
the continued importance of a holistic approach that
addresses conflict-related sexual violence as part of
the broader women and peace and security agenda,
recognizing that sexual and gender-based violence are
also the results of gender inequalities and women's and
girls' subordinated positions and patriarchal contexts.
While sexual and gender-based violence predominantly
target women and girls, men and boys are also among
the primary and secondary victims of those crimes.

The issue of stigma placed on the victim rather than
on the perpetrator, where it would rightfully belong,
must be analysed and addressed within the broader
context of sexual and gender-based violence. It is well
known that stigma in the wake of sexual violence can
have lasting and even lethal repercussions. Every person
who has suffered from sexual violence must have the
right and access to comprehensive health-care services,
justice and reparations, and not be revictimized,
rejected, ostracized or worse.

The European Union wants to see practical
steps towards effective prevention and protection
from conflict-related sexual violence. It remains
unacceptable that most incidents of conflict-related
sexual violence, including rape, continue to be met with
impunity. It is nothing but a failure that, for instance,
not a single member of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant or Boko Haram has yet been prosecuted for
sexual offences. Accountability and access tojustice are
a must. Victims and witnesses of sexual violence have
to be ensured access to impartial and safe tribunals and
reparations, including as a form of transitional gender

justice, and their safety must be sufficiently addressed
during and after those legal processes.

The European Union has implemented a global
project to support gender-sensitive transitional justice.
The project has been realized in Kenya, Kosovo,
Colombia and the Philippines, and also supported the
development of global norms and standards. Another
EU action implemented in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo strengthened the capacities of the military
justice system to prosecute war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in the Kasai and the east
of the country. The project supported military courts,
which then tried and convicted 11 militiamen and a
provincial member of Parliament for crimes against
humanity, rape and murder committed between 2013
and 2016.
The EU is determined to remain a global leader
in ending sexual and gender-based violence, including
in conflict-related situations. One example of that
is the joint EU-United Nations Spotlight Initiative to
eliminate violence against women and girls. Launched
in September 2017 with an initial investment of
€500 million by the EU, the Spotlight Initiative
recognizes that women and girls are disproportionately
subjected to violence, including femicide, sexual
violence, intimate partner violence, trafficking
and harmful practices. It is one of the largest-scale
demonstrations of the political will of the European
Union and the United Nations to say "enough is
enough". We must act now to address gender-based
violence in all its forms.

We continue to support United Nations action
against conflict-related sexual violence. We recognize
that the United Nations peacekeeping operations play a
vital role in the protection ofwomen, girls, men and boys
as part of their mandated task of protecting civilians.
We also stress the importance of training peacekeeping
personnel in preventing sexual exploitation and abuse.

In addition, we stress the importance of actions

designed and implemented in partnership with civil
society, ensuring that they are able to influence the
analysis, design and planning of activities related to
the prevention and protection against conflict-related
sexual violence. We are troubled about the continuously
shrinking space for civil society in many parts of the
world, including attempts to silence women's voices by
threatening them with rape.

In 2017, the EU allocated almost €22 million in
humanitarian aid to the prevention of and response to
sexual and gender-based violence worldwide. In June
2017, the EU took over the leadership of the Call to
Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence
in Emergencies - a global initiative of more than 76
stakeholders to make sure that all humanitarian actors
work together to prevent and mitigate gender-based
violence, from the earliest onset ofa crisis.

Also in June 2017, the EU signed the Council
of Europe Istanbul Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and domestic
violence. With that signature, we committed to
further strengthening the existing legal framework on
preventing and combating violence against women.
The EU is also continuously working to improve its
procedures and practices in its civilian missions and
military operations. Last year, we took stock of our
programmes and projects that address conflict-related
sexual violence. We have identified 43 multi-year
projects, with an overall value of €43 million, and two
multi-country programmes, with an overall value of
€8.5 million.

The EU will continue to accelerate the
implementation of our commitments to eliminating
sexual and gender-based violence, both within and
outside our borders and in times of peace, crisis and
conflict. We will continue to provide specific support
to victims of violence, including in the most remote
and fragile areas. The EU is also strengthening
efforts to ensure that women, girls, men and boys
who arrive in the European Union fleeing conflict,
instability, persecution, discrimination or violence,
including sexual violence, have access to medical care,
legal support, appropriate trauma counselling and
psychosocial care.

The EU would like to see us all collectively
continue to build on and strengthen what is already
in place. Furthermore, we must all acknowledge and
address the necessity of partnerships and clear roles
and responsibilities, as well as the close alignment
of programmes. We must also ask ourselves the
uncomfortable question of whose security and safety
are being addressed and resourced, and whether there
are things we are not yet doing, but need to be done.
We heed the call of the Secretary-General to reinforce
our efforts, with urgency, to prevent and protect more
women, girls, men and boys from falling victim to
those heinous crimes and we hope that others will join
us in that fight.

A full version ofthis statement will be posted online.

