Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia would like to associate itself with the
expressions of gratitude for the holding of this debate,
which will certainly contribute to increasing
understanding and awareness of this tragic aspect of
armed conflict. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/604), and
Special Representative of the Secretary General
Margot Wallstrom for her excellent presentation
yesterday.

Allow me first to emphasize the importance of
the role of the United Nations in promoting the
participation of women in achieving peace, security
and development, as well as in the initiatives
undertaken in response to the problem of sexual
violence in conflicts.

Colombia endorses the repeated statements issued
by the Security Council in connection with all acts of
sexual violence and other violence against civilians in
armed conflict, in particular against women and
children. We regret the fact that, despite those
statements, various armed groups continue to commit
such acts.

International efforts by the Organization, in
particular the establishment of UN Women, contribute
10-69905
to strengthening coordination and cooperation in the
implementation of mandates on women peace and
security. Broad and inclusive intergovernmental
consultations to assess the gender architecture and the
advancement of women, as well as agreement among
States as to the models and practices to be adopted on
this topic, are fundamental to making progress in
enhancing national capacities to eliminate sexual
violence in conflict.

Strengthening the rule of law as an essential
element in the search for lasting solutions to sexual
violence in conflict is one aspect addressed in the
report of the Secretary General. My delegation would
like to highlight that approach and to encourage the
United Nations to continue to broaden it.

The work done in this area by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
United Nations Development Programme has our full
support.

Resolution 1888 (2009) includes provisions for
increasing the participation of women in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. We agree that their
participation in that regard contributes to creating an
atmosphere of trust in which women and children can
expose the abuses to which they are subjected. We also
believe that their inclusion can generate greater
participation by women in law enforcement, militaries
and police agencies in countries in which they are
deployed.

For several months, therefore, Colombia has been
a contributor to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, providing two female police officers
with a strong background in human rights and the
protection of children and adolescents. Colombia
would like to reiterate its willingness to step up its
contribution in that regard. We hope that, in
implementing resolution 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009),
mechanisms for cooperation, constructive dialogue and
effective support to countries will be promoted. We
also highlight the role that the General Assembly can
play in strengthening cooperation with States in the
complex tasks that have been set out.

Strengthening the role and capacity of women, as
well as justice and the enforcement of their rights, is of
utmost importance for the Government of Colombia. In
that effort, the contribution of the United Nations
system and the international community is essential.

Colombia, in its capacity as one of the Friends of
1325, will continue to closely monitor developments in
the area of women and peace and security and
reiterates its commitment to the implementation of
policies, plans and programmes that expand and
strengthen the role of women in peacebuilding.

Ms. Wallstrom's dedication, dynamic work and
commitment to this cause deserve our recognition and
all our support.

