Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): First, Madam
President, allow me to thank you for having convened
this debate on a topic that my delegation is particularly
glad to see addressed. Armenia aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union delivered this
morning, and I would like to make some brief
observations in my national capacity.

We join previous speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Michelle
Bachelet and the President of the Economic and Social
Council for their contributions. We also welcome the
Secretary-General's report on women and peace and
security (S/2011/598*), which includes guidance for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and for
the use of the set of indicators for monitoring progress
and implementing the framework, and we take note of
the recommendations contained in the report.
In regard to its resolution 1325 (2000), over the
past decade the Security Council has put in place a
normative framework on women's participation in
peace processes, the protection and promotion of
women's human rights, the mainstreaming of gender
equality, and perspectives in the context of armed
conflict, peacebuilding and reconstruction. As the
Secretary-General notes, many peace processes now
regularly include consultations with many women's
peace groups. In many post-conflict countries, the
number of women in the Government has increased
dramatically and they have used their public decision-
making roles to advance women's rights.

Despite this progress, however, much still needs
to be addressed and accomplished, as the female voice
is not always heard. It is a matter of concern that
progress in addressing the many constraints on
women's capacity to participate in sufficient numbers
is still slow. In this regard, the most important agenda
item is increasing the presence of women in decision-
making processes. Women remain largely excluded,
especially from efforts to find workable solutions to
conflicts, and we should further promote their
participation. The inclusion of women in all stages of
the peace process guarantees a more lasting and
representative settlement. That being the case, we
should further promote their participation and
recognize the important contributions that women have
made to achieving transparent and accountable
Governments in many countries.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
express the importance of women's political
participation in times of peace and conflict alike, and
at all stages of peaceful settlements. We have
experienced this first-hand in our region.
Representatives of Armenian and Azerbaijani women's
non-governmental organizations have discussed ways
of finding peaceful solutions to the Nagorno Karabakh
issue. These peace dialogues have also been oriented
towards implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
More meetings of both sides are expected to take place.

We believe that there are a number of ways to
increase women's political participation through more
gender-sensitive electoral laws and processes and the
implementation of specific quotas and capacity-
building programmes for female candidates, as well as
awareness-raising among political parties and the
general public. Meaningful policy changes can also be
achieved through such means as technical assistance,
as well as support for civil society and the media in
monitoring and evaluating national actions taken in
these areas. We will work closely with the United
Nations and other institutions and organizations
concerned to expand and implement the resolution
1325 (2000) agenda towards bettering the situation of
women around the world, including those affected by
armed conflict.

