The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Azerbaijan for organizing this debate on the theme
of women, the rule of law and transitional justice. I
commend the Security Council for having adopted
resolution 2122 (2013) today, underscoring the central
importance of women's participation in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
I welcome the call for concrete actions not only to
increase the number of women in peacemaking but
also, crucially, to improve the way gender issues are
addressed by peace and security institutions, including
the Council itself. These priorities are also featured
in my seven-point action plan on gender-responsive
peacebuilding.

The rule of law, women's access to transitional
justice and women's participation are deeply connected.
Women must be involved at every stage of efforts to
reassert the rule of law and rebuild societies through
transitional justice. Their needs for security and justice
must be addressed. Their voices must be heard. Their
rights must be protected.

I urge the Council to deal with the full range of
women's rights violations that occur during conflicts.
The mandates of political and peacekeeping missions
should support national prosecutions for serious
international crimes against women, and special
measures should be taken to provide women with
opportunities to engage in the design and delivery of
transitional justice. Gender-responsive transitional
justice measures can also help to redress historic
gender-based injustices and combat the security threats
and other obstacles that often restrict women's full
engagement in public life.

The United Nations is developing good practices
to embed gender dimensions in transitional justice and
peacebuilding. We are working to ensure that women
are represented on all United Nations mediation support
teams. All United Nations-led or co-led peace processes
are reaching out to women's civil society organizations.
Our United Nations Global Focal Point on Police, Justice
and Corrections is integrating gender perspectives
into all aspects of our rule of law activities. We have
significantly increased the percentage of female police
peacekeepers and are helping local security sectors
tackle sexual and gender-based violence. We have also
completed a study on ways to enhance women's access
to justice in conflict-affected settings.

Human rights mechanisms are also critical. I am
pleased that the Committee on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women is advancing
a new general recommendation on women in conflict
prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations.

Notwithstanding these advances, the fact remains
that while we have seen a slow but steady increase in
women leaders in business and politics, this progress
has not been matched around the peace table. Gains in
the representation of women are often achieved through
the use of temporary special measures, including
quotas. Similar special measures could help to increase
the number of women at all levels of mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

I am pleased that my report (S/2013/525) will
be introduced today by Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of
UN Women. This is her first such appearance before the
Security Council. My report this year notes progress,
but also calls for a more determined global effort to
improve the protection of women and girls and enhance
women's participation and leadership.

I have sought to lead by example by appointing
more women to senior positions throughout the United
Nations. For the first time in history, five United
Nations peacekeeping operations - in South Sudan,
Liberia, Cyprus, Haiti and Cote d'Ivoire - are led by
women. Last year, Ms. Aichatou Souleymane - who
now heads our efforts in Cote d'Ivoire - served as
acting Joint Chief Mediator in Darfur. This year, I
appointed Mary Robinson, my Special Envoy to the
Great Lakes Region of Africa, as the United Nations
first woman lead mediator in a peace process.
We have more distance to travel, but we have never
been this far before. Women's participation in peace
efforts is a matter of gender equality and universal
human rights, and crucial to achieving sustainable
peace, economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy. Today's resolution makes that point loud
and clear.

Societies emerging from conflict face a wealth
of challenges unique to their circumstances, but all
encounter a crucial moment at which they can begin
again, draw lessons from the upheaval and gain
a new path of stability and progress. Transitional
justice, with its various mechanisms to promote
reconciliation, redress and compensation, has proven
to play a critical role. But the success of such processes
depends fundamentally on their inclusiveness and the
involvement of women, of minorities, of aggrieved
parties, and of all stakeholders.

The year 2015 will mark the fifteenth anniversary
ofthe adoption resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace
and security. The Council has called for a high-level
review meeting to mark that occasion. I am confident
that with the Council's continued support, we can
achieve concrete results and measurable change in the
lives of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
settings.

