Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): This open debate is
being held on the eve of significant landmarks and
anniversaries. Next year we will celebrate the seventy-
fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations. We will mark 25 years since the adoption of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
This is therefore an opportune time to reflect on our
achievements, as well as on lost opportunities, and to
consider a course correction where needed.

While we have made considerable progress on the
normative front, the world remains a very dangerous
place, especially for women and girls who find
themselves caught in the vortex of pain and suffering
caused by seemingly unending wars, protracted disputes
and foreign occupation. Despite our best intentions and
efforts, they continue to suffer disproportionately with
lasting consequences. According to the recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800), more than
50 parties in various conflicts around the world are
suspected of having committed or instigated patterns
of rape and other forms of sexual violence in situations
that are on the agenda of the Security Council.

Women not only remain the primary victims of
hostilities and sexual violence in conflict situations;
they also face multiple practical and institutional
barriers that prevent them from participating fully and
substantively in peace processes.

Resolution 1325 (2000) marked a watershed in
placing women's issues at the centre of the global
conflict-prevention debate within the larger context
of international peace and security. While the agenda
has sought the feminization of peace in a post-conflict
environment, a greater effort will be needed to
safeguard and protect countless women whose suffering
we continue to discount or ignore owing to exigencies
of realpolitik or geopolitical interests.

We need to reaffirm that this agenda applies to
all women in conflict situations, especially in cases
of foreign occupation, such as in occupied Jammu
and Kashmir. For almost three months, the world has
witnessed in horror as India's cruel clampdown on
all civil liberties in occupied Kashmir and its illegal
annexation of the disputed territory, in gross Violation
of international law and several Security Council
resolutions, have exacerbated and compounded the
suffering of people, especially women and girls.

The anguish of Kashmiri women is further
compounded when their family members, including
children, are kidnapped in midnight raids, illegally
detained and then tortured by occupying forces and
when unremitting restrictions on movement and
communication condemns women in occupied Kashmir
to seeing their children suffer and die as a result of the
lack of medical help. The continuing lockdown has
not only made access to health care, food supplies
and even communication with loved ones next to
impossible; it has also made women more vulnerable
to abuse as they are left at the mercy of occupying
forces enforcing an inhumane curfew. Rape, after all,
has long been used there and confirmed in the reports
of international human rights organizations as a brutal
tactic to humiliate an entire community and people.
This travesty ofjustice must end. The Security Council
must live up to its responsibilities and address this dire
and unacceptable situation.

Peacekeeping operations and uniformed personnel,
as we all know very well, remain the most Visible
representatives and symbol of the United Nations
working directly with communities every day. They
have a critical role to play in mainstreaming gender
perspectives in peace and security. Among the world's
top troop-contributors to United Nations peacekeeping,
my country, Pakistan, for its part is not only training
its Blue Helmets along those lines, but it has also
increased the number of its female peacekeepers and
met the United Nations target of 15 per cent women
in our troop contributions to the United Nations - a
target that we met with great pride.

Finally, as this is my last statement as the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan in the Security Council, I
would like to conclude by saying that giving women
a key role not only brings fresh perspectives but can
also be a game-changer in contributing significantly to
building a foundation for lasting and sustainable peace.
I am the first woman from my country in 70 years to
represent the Islamic Republic of Pakistan at the United
Nations. It has been a great honour and privilege,
especially to speak in this Chamber. I am confident
it will not be another 70 years before Pakistan sends
another woman to represent our great country.

