Mrs. Chaimongkol (Thailand): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for having organized this timely
debate. Thailand would like to commend the Secretary-
General for his excellent reports on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and
women's participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
The Thai delegation would also like to align itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

On this occasion, Thailand would like to
emphasize a few aspects of peacebuilding that we
believe to be crucial to its success and conducive to
women's participation in the process.

While post-conflict societies, at least initially,
may require and rely on assistance from the
international community, fostering national ownership
is of paramount importance to the success of
peacebuilding. Institutions of governance and
operational mechanisms must be developed not only to
conform to international standards, but also to reflect
local needs and conditions. Moreover, national
capacity must be developed in the early stages to
ensure prosperity and the sustainability of peace and
security.

If peace and security are to be sustainable, it is
necessary to address the root causes of conflict. Often,
this means creating a new sense of shared purpose and
common values for post-conflict societies. This is a
task best left to the national leadership, but should be
encouraged where possible by the international
community.

Predictable, timely and sufficient national and
international support is also essential to the success of
the peacebuilding process. In this connection, Thailand
welcomes the ongoing international review of civilian
capacity. The review should contribute considerably to
narrowing the serious gap in national and international
capacities, and thus to ensuring a smooth transition
from conflict to peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. Thailand also
appreciates the Secretary-General's efforts to
strengthen civilian capacities in the global South and
among women.

Thailand firmly believes that women's
participation in all aspects of peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development will
contribute significantly to long-term and sustainable
peace and security in post-conflict societies. Since it is
mostly men who participate in conflict, it is important
to encourage the role of women in order to help
stabilize post-conflict environments and restore the
fabric of society. In this regard, Thailand takes note
with appreciation of the Secretary-General's action
plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding as a concrete
step to women's empowerment in post-conflict
societies.

Peacebuilding is a complex and multifaceted task.
As we approach the end of our period of membership
of the Peacebuilding Commission Organizational
Committee, Thailand hopes that we have contributed in
some small way to the work of the Commission, and
that it will lead towards a more efficient, flexible and
comprehensive approach to peacebuilding challenges
in post-conflict situations around the world.

