Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having convened this important open debate.

Despite the achievements of the international
community in the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, the statistics and
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General before us today (S/2019/800) make
it abundantly clear that, regrettably, we are still falling
short of our objectives. There is a pressing need to
intensify international efforts to overcome all the
challenges that currently stand in the way of the effective
involvement of women in peace and security activities.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
State of Qatar has been working hard to support the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda at all levels, together with our support for all
peace efforts. We contributed to the global review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
which concluded that the involvement of women in
peace operations has a lasting and positive impact on
promoting and sustaining peace and on preventing
conflict. In that context, we need to redouble our
efforts to implement the recommendations contained
in that important study, as well as the provisions of
all the resolutions pertaining to the women and peace
and security agenda. Such action will contribute
directly to achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

The commemoration of the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) represents an
important opportunity for us to mobilize global action
towards the implementation of every aspect of the very
extensive normative framework surrounding the women
and peace and security agenda. It is also important on
this occasion to consolidate our efforts to implement
women and peace and security agenda and the youth
and peace and security agenda, which was adopted with
resolution 2250 (2015), which referred for the first time
to the vital contribution of youth to lasting peace.

For the sake of unifying efforts and demonstrating
the linkage between the two resolutions on the
ground, on the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the fifth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) and the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, the State of Qatar will host the
second International Symposium on Youth Participation
in Peace Processes. The Symposium will focus on the
participation of young women in peace processes, both
in panel discussions and by ensuring gender parity in
the course of the preparation for all the Symposium's
phases. We are currently working with the Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth with a view to making an
effective contribution to the implementation of the two
resolutions on the ground. The Symposium will also
take place against the backdrop of the first International
Symposium on Youth Participation in Peace Processes,
which the State of Qatar co-hosted with Finland and
Colombia in March.

My country intends to do its utmost to strengthen
the role of women in peacemaking through practical,
pragmatic actions. For example, we sponsored
inter-Afghan dialogue on peace and security and
ensured that Afghani women were included in the peace
discussions. The Doha Intra-Afghan Peace Conference,
which we successfully co-hosted with the Federal
Republic of Germany in July, enjoyed the participation
of distinguished Afghani women in its various meetings
and groups, including the Government, the Peace
Council, civil society and youth.

In conclusion, we emphasize the commitment
of the State of Qatar to maintaining our cooperation
with all relevant parties involved in the women and
peace and security agenda at the national, regional
and international levels. We also intend to provide
the support necessary to ensure the implementation
of the agenda on the ground, which will contribute
to achieving lasting peace and security throughout
the world.

