Mr. Antonio: Let me begin by joining preceding
speakers in congratulating the presidency for the United
Kingdom's accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would like to express the
African Union's (AU) deep appreciation for the holding
of this open debate on a topic of great importance, as
illustrated by the overwhelming number of participants.

This debate bears eloquent testimony to the United
Kingdom's commitment and efforts towards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions at the highest political level. The adoption,
under the United Kingdom's leadership of the Group
of Eight Summit, held in London on 11 April, of the
declaration on preventing sexual violence in conflict
further reflects that commitment.

I also wish to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his personal commitment
and engagement in giving this issue the attention it
deserves. I would also like to thank Ms. Bangura for
her leadership in representing the African continent.
We want her to know how proud we are of the work she
is doing on this important issue.

The issue of sexual violence in conflict implies
a collective moral obligation and provokes a sense of
urgency, given the ongoing escalation of this crime and
its devastating effects on its innocent victims women
and girls, men and boys. The African Union's efforts
have focused on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in conjunction with the gender policy adopted by
the African Union in 2009. Furthermore, the AU's road
map for the African Peace and Security Architecture
for the period 2011-2013 devotes an entire section to the
topic of women and peace and security. The AU Peace
and Security Department has taken concrete steps to
mainstream gender into its work at the institutional,
operational and programmatic levels. The inclusion
of gender experts as part of post-conflict needs-
assessment missions undertaken by the Peace and
Security Reconstruction Department is a step forward
in formulating efficient post-conflict reconstruction
programmes.

 

Similarly, efforts have also been made within AU
peace support operations to address the different needs
of men and women as peacekeepers, while recognizing
that much more must be done at the cultural and policy
levels to address gender differences in such operations.
In 2011, as part of its efforts to raise awareness in the
Peace and Security Council on the situation of women
and children in Africa, the AU Panel of the Wise
commissioned a report on mitigating the vulnerabilities
of women and children in armed conflicts in 2011. The
report highlights how rape and sexual and gender-based
violence have reached pandemic proportions during
conflicts. Within its mandate, the Peace and Security
Department has a central role to play in developing and
implementing strategies on preventing and responding
to sexual violence and sexual exploitation and abuse.

It was in that context that the African Union
Peace and Security Council held a meeting on
28 March 2011 on the theme of women and children
and other vulnerable groups in armed conflict, with the
participation, among others, of the then United Nations
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Building on that meeting, given the priority accorded
this issue by the leadership of the African Union
Commission, efforts are under way to appoint an AU
special representative on sexual Violence in conflict.

The African Union Commission has been
encouraged by its continued strong collaboration with
the United Nations through the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, with a View to signing a cooperation
framework in the near future. We are convinced that the
envisaged cooperation framework will go a long way to
enhancing cooperation and coordination between the
African Union Commission and the United Nations as
they address conflict-related sexual violence.

