Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would also like to join my
colleagues in thanking Germany for convening today's
important open debate.

We will soon be approaching the twentieth
anniversary of the Council's adoption of its landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women andpeace and security,
which mobilized global efforts to eliminate the scourge
of conflict-related sexual violence. Since then, we have
collectively made significant progress in establishing
and strengthening the legal and normative framework
for addressing that challenge. The international will to
investigate conflict-based sexual violence is also much
stronger today than ever before. Yet in many conflict
situations around the world women, especially young
girls, continue to bear the brunt of both physical and
psychological abuse and trauma. From Myanmar to my
country's region, the world continues to watch in horror
as rape and sexual abuse are employed with impunity
as a deliberate means to oppress entire populations and
humiliate and terrorize them. As the Secretary-General
noted in his recent report (S/2019/280), sexual violence
continues to be employed as a broader strategy for
repression, domination and subjugation to deliberately
harm and scar defenceless and vulnerable communities.

Our fight against impunity for conflict-related
sexual violence must continue, with a greater
commitment to holding aggressors to account and never
allowing political or geopolitical interests to constrain
or compromise our efforts. By focusing on creating
an enabling environment for the more meaningful
participation of women, and by securing their seats at
the table as true partners and stakeholders in all matters
related to peace, mediation and reconciliation, we can
certainly give peace efforts a much better chance to
succeed. I would like to make six brief, specific points.

First, while the Security Council has led the way in
drawing international attention to such horrific crimes,
it should also focus on addressing the root causes of
conflicts, notably the protracted disputes of Jammu
and Kashmir and Palestine. After all, one of the most
effective ways to prevent conflict-based sexual violence
is to eliminate the breeding grounds that are created by
unresolved, protracted disputes. By leaving disputes
unaddressed, the Council runs the risk of acting
selectively and displaying a blind spot for some of the
most vulnerable women who suffer disproportionately
from violence perpetrated by foreign occupation.

Secondly, national Governments have a critical role
to play in securing accountability for sexual violence
and abuse. Only by strengthening national criminal
justice systems and enacting strict victim- and witness-
protection laws can impunity be effectively denied to
the perpetrators of such heinous crimes.

Thirdly, real justice for the survivors of sexual abuse
in conflict situations does not end with the prosecution
of the perpetrators. It also requires concerted efforts
to restore victims' dignity and ensure their honourable
reintegration into the community by shielding them
from any consequent stigma or victimization.

Fourthly, by enlisting faith leaders and respected
figures from within communities, we can further
promote efforts to mitigate the stigma suffered by
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.

Fifthly, we also need to enlist more women in
peacebuilding and mediation processes in order to take
advantage of their unique skill sets. We are encouraged
by the fact that women's protection advisers have
been deployed in seven United Nations peacekeeping
operations to convene the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence in the field. At the same time, more women
should be appointed to leadership roles, particularly as
special envoys and special representatives.

Finally, gender perspectives should be fully
integrated into the peacebuilding paradigm, which
would greatly enhance women's role in peace accords,
as well as in the post-conflict stabilization and
reconstruction phases. Pakistan, as one of the leading
troop contributors to the United Nations, is deploying
a female infantry engagement team in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo next month. We have also recently
achieved the goal of deploying 15 per cent female staff
officers among all those deployed in our peacekeeping
missions, thereby fulfilling our responsibilities in
accordance with the uniformed gender-parity strategy
and Security Council resolutions.

In conclusion, Pakistan has always remained
a resolute supporter of global efforts to protect the
vulnerable, including women and children. Our
professional peacekeepers to the United Nations,
including our female peacekeepers, continue to set the
highest standards in fulfilling peacekeeping mandates
and protecting all vulnerable sectors of the population,
including women, from violence in some of the most
dangerous and complex conflict situations around
the world.

