The President: I thank Ms. Diop for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.

Yesterday morning, the Deputy Secretary-General;
the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security; and I arrived in New York from Niger.
It was my privilege to join Amina and Bineta on that
joint high-level mission focused on women, peace
and security in the Sahel. It is also now my pleasure
to welcome my travel companions to today's meeting.
As they have done already, I would like to thank the
Governments of the Niger and Chad for their generous
hospitality, and the inspiring women and men we met
during our mission for sharing their stories with us.

I would like to make three points following our
mission: first, on the overall challenges in the region,
secondly, how we must address the interrelated nature
of these challenges, and thirdly, that all this is not a
women's issue - it is a peace and security issue.

The countries we visited and the Sahel region are
located between hope and despair. There is hope, because
the Sahel is blessed with abundant human, cultural and
natural resources - for example, solar energy, which
offers tremendous capital for rapid growth. It is also the
most youthful region of the world, with 64.5 per cent of
the population aged less than 25 years.

Hope was inspired also by the women and girls we
met, who had moved from being victims to survivors to
agents of change; by youth, who look to their futures with
confidence despite their difficult circumstances; and by

the vibrant and determined civil society organizations
working to improve the lives of men, women, girls
and boys across the region. We also heard from the
Governments of Chad and the Niger about their efforts,
undertaken together with other countries in the region,
to promote regional stability and combat terrorism,
including through the Multinational Joint Task Force
and the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force.

However, there is also despair because of chronic
underdevelopment, terrorism and violent extremism,
a lack of respect for human rights and the negative
effects of climate change. There are 24 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance, and the growing
insecurity has worsened vulnerabilities. Today, the
national budgets are used to finance security concerns,
as we already heard, with less money available for
education and health. Those challenges affect women
and men, boys and girls differently. Women often bear
a disproportionate burden.

In the Lake Chad region, where people are already
facing a food and nutrition crisis, we heard how the
shrinking of the Lake and growing insecurity have had
severe consequences for people who traditionally have
sustained themselves by fishing activities. However,
now, women are learning to fish. They said that before
the fish were this big and men did the fishing; now the
fish are this small and we can fish. The fisherwomen
we met in Bol told us that they wished for only three
things: bigger boats, better nets and to not get raped.
That simple request illustrates the conditions under
which they live, marked by poverty and sexual and
gender-based violence.

In both Chad and the Niger, we met with civil society
representatives who described challenges such as a
lack of female candidates for public offices, inadequate
health care and difficulties in ensuring education for
girls. In the Niger, we heard that three out of four girls
will be married before turning 18, with devastating
consequences, as Ms. Diop has already said. We met
with women religious leaders and discussed efforts to
prevent radicalization and to end the practice of child
marriages. We were encouraged to see that in both
countries, women were coming together in networks
to address the challenges they face, including sexual
and reproductive health and rights and access to basic
social services.

Secondly, this joint mission encompassed all
aspects of the United Nations work - peace and
security, human rights, humanitarian assistance and
development. It was once again clear to me, during
our mission, how those areas of work overlap. The
many challenges in the Sahel cannot be dealt with
separately, but rather require joint political strategies
and integrated responses.

The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel and its support plan are key tools at our disposal
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and the
African Union's Agenda 2063. Gender equality and
women's empowerment is one of the Strategy's five
key priorities. We must spare no effort in ensuring
implementation. We need to expand the choices and
opportunities available to women from an early age.
That means ensuring education for girls, addressing
restrictive traditional and related social norms, and
fighting poverty. It means going back to basics, starting
where we can make a difference.

Yet, the resources needed to fully address the
challenges in the region are woefully inadequate. We
need to step up our efforts to mobilize support and
strengthen national capacities to respond to inequalities,
fight impunity, create sustainable livelihoods and
empower and educate women and girls. Aid must be
gender-sensitive and take into account the various
situations in which women and men find themselves, as
well as promoting equality.

Thirdly, our visit also underscored that all of this
taken together is not solely a women's issue - it is a
peace and security issue. In the Lac region of Chad we
were deeply moved by Halima, who had been married
off as a 15-year-old child and then trained by Boko
Haram to be a suicide bomber. She lost both her legs
when the suicide vests of some of the girls who had
been trained with her exploded as they entered a busy
market. Today Halima is a paralegal and is actively
engaged in the prevention of violent extremism, as well
as being a powerful symbol of the many roles of women
in peace and security.

The increased use of female suicide bombers - two
thirds of suicide attacks in 2017 were carried out by
women or girls - illustrates the cruel way in which
terrorists seek to exploit the perceived goodness of
women to maximize harm, to the victims of suicide
bombings and to communities and families. That is
disastrous given women's role as pillars of families,
societies and communities. Societies could collapse, but
nonetheless women continue to fight. We must empower
and educate girls and women and end child marriage.
To fight terrorism, there is no doubt, we need adopt a
gender-sensitive and human rights-based approach,
whether it pertains to the prevention of radicalization,
counter-terrorism operations or providing support
to victims.

Let me end by answering the question of why this
is a matter for those around this table, a matter for
the Security Council. It is because women's destiny
is also our destiny. Therefore, what can and must we
do? In two years resolution 1325 (2000) will be 20
years old. I would like to put the following challenge
to the United Nations system and all Member States:
by 2020 ensure that United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions fully deliver on the women and
peace and security agenda. The Security Council has a
critical role to play, including by ensuring that women's
voices are heard around peace negotiation tables and
in the Chamber; mission mandates include a women
and peace and security perspective; gender posts in
missions continue to be funded; women and peace and
security tasks are adequately resourced and prioritized;
and that gender is systematically included in mission
reporting and monitoring.

We must all set the same challenge for ourselves.
Members can count on Sweden to do its part to support
that effort. To start, we will continue to ensure that
civil society perspectives are heard in the Chamber.
For the annual debate on resolution 1325 (2000),
we commit to hosting a civil society forum. We also
commit to supporting the Secretariat to build capacity
for enhanced gender-responsive reporting. Only then
will we gain a full understanding of the challenges and
of the most effective responses.

Let us continue to intensify our efforts to support
the countries of the Sahel on the issues we have
discussed today. I commend the African Union and
the United Nations for joining forces and deepening
their partnership on the issue of women and peace
and security. Missions such as the one undertaken last
week should become annual events, and every Security
Council meeting should consider the women and peace
and security perspective as an essential part of our work
to end conflicts. I have no doubt that, if we were to
do so, our motto of "more women, more peace" would
become a reality.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.

