Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
wish to start by extending to you, Mr. President, the
most heartfelt congratulations of my delegation upon
Uganda's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We all know Uganda's consistent interest in
the issues of international peace and security. The
choice of subject for today's debate on peacebuilding,
Sir, clearly shows your country's commitment.

I should also like to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General at this debate and to convey to him
my gratitude for his two reports - on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and
women's participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).

I would also like to convey my gratitude to
Ambassador Peter Wittig, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for all the information he
provided to us. I pay tribute to the outstanding work
which he has carried out at the head of the
Commission.

Our debate takes place at a time when we are
assessing peacebuilding experiences in Burundi,
Guinea-Bissau, the Central African Republic and Sierra
Leone, within the framework of the Peacebuilding
Commission. This exercise affords us an opportunity to
re-examine the missions entrusted to this body and to
rethink our overall peacebuilding strategy on the basis
of a cohesive, coordinated and integrated approach
which gives pride of place to mechanisms of national
and regional ownership in the reconstruction process.
That is the thrust of the new United Nations
peacebuilding agenda for action proposed to us by the
Secretary-General in the report submitted for our
consideration, and my country fully backs it.

This new agenda, in our view, meets the need, on
the one hand, to tailor peacekeeping operations to
needs on the ground and, on the other, to take into
account all aspects of post-conflict peacebuilding.
Here, my country welcomes the efforts undertaken to
those ends in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Chad, Timor-Leste and Afghanistan, to limit myself to
these few examples. The same applies to post-disaster
Haiti, following the horrible disaster that struck that
country at the beginning of this year.
The comprehensive and integrated approach with
a View to lasting peace does not end at guaranteeing
political and security stability. It must also be
supported by measures aimed at laying the foundations
for sustainable development and lasting democracy,
while strengthening, in particular, the political, judicial
and institutional architecture as well as the economic
and social fabric in a post-conflict country.

A number of examples illustrate the effectiveness
of this approach. It is true of the elections held in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and,
recently, Burundi. It is also true of the strengthening of
judicial and police institutions in Liberia and Sierra
Leone, as well as the creation of development poles in
the Central African Republic.

The statements we have just heard illustrate the
extent to which peacebuilding is a complex and
multifaceted endeavour. It demands the constant effort
of the international community in collaboration with
national authorities and, of course, an intensive
mobilization of significant human and financial
resources. To this end, the Peacebuilding Commission
will have to continue to bolster its action on the ground
and strengthen its partnerships with international
financial institutions and regional organizations. The
contribution of bilateral and multilateral donors is vital
in this regard.

Accordingly, we can only encourage the stepped-
up action by the European Union and the World Bank
in favour of peacebuilding undertaken by our
Organization. We call for greater cooperation with the
African Union and the various regional economic
communities in Africa.

The Council will agree that there can be no
lasting peace in post-conflict countries unless women
are effectively involved in the stabilization and
development processes of these countries. This is
addressed in resolution 1325 (2000), whose tenth
anniversary we mark this month. To date, the success
of this resolution is reflected in the increased
participation of women in peace processes. Today, one
notes the increased number of women heading peace
missions and civilian components of peacekeeping
operations. We are gratified by the fact that the
Secretary-General's action plan for gender-responsible
peacebuilding is part and parcel of the Council's
approach aimed at bolstering the involvement of
women in post-conflict peace and reconstruction
efforts.

This plan provides Member States with a solid
and credible foundation for meeting their commitments
on implementing relevant Security Council resolutions.
This is the right time and place to pay tribute to
the role played by civil society organizations in making
States more aware of the importance of involving
women in peacebuilding activities.

I cherish the hope that the setting up this year of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, better known as "UN
Women", headed by Ms. Michelle Bachelet, will,
amongst its other missions, back this very important
development. I wish to reaffirm Gabon's readiness to
work side by side with UN Women in developing this
approach.

I should like to conclude by voicing my
delegation's backing for the presidential statement
which we will adopt following this debate.

