Mr. McHugh (Ireland): I thank you for convening
today's important debate, Mr. President. Ireland was
proud to be a sponsor of resolution 2331 (2016), on
trafficking in persons in conflict, when it was adopted
in December, and today's debate is a crucial opportunity
to continue that momentum. This is an issue that
affects more than 21 million people worldwide, more
than 5 million of them women and children, and it is
therefore incumbent on us to do everything we can to
address it.

I align myself fully with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union (EU).
The EU has also taken a leading role in various policy
and programme initiatives to prevent and combat
human trafficking, and Ireland will continue to support
those endeavours. I will make three points in my
national capacity.

The first is that human trafficking is a reality
and we must respond to it. Sensitization training and
capacity-building should be at the core of our response
to cases ofhuman trafficking, forced labour and modern
slavery. Security officials must know the signs to look
for and the support to ask for. First responders must
be sensitized in order to ensure that victims, especially
women and girls, receive the medical and psychosocial
care that they urgently need. Law-enforcement and legal
officials must be aware ofthe rights and responsibilities
involved in such cases. Civil-society organizations
must be empowered to act as watchdogs throughout. An
effective response to human trafficking also requires
that partnerships be formed both within and across
international and regional bodies. We are pleased to see
the growing partnership between INTERPOL and the
United Nations as one example of progress in that area.
The work of United Nations regional offices in building
partnerships with subregional organizations will also
play a key role going forward.

Secondly, human trafficking will continue if
we do not prioritize prevention. Ireland believes that
impunity acts as a driver of human trafficking. We need
to tackle that head-on and see accountability as a key
to prevention. National systems must be equipped to
uphold international and customary standards of justice
in cases related to human trafficking and modern slavery.
Moreover, we strongly believe that we need to focus
more on the conditions that make people vulnerable to
human traffickers, leading to their becoming trapped
in cycles of forced labour or modern slavery. Poverty
and economic hardship are major factors in that
regard. That is why implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development is crucial. Human trafficking
is explicitly addressed in four of the Sustainable
Development Goals, although implementation of all
17 Goals will ultimately be necessary if we are to tackle
the root causes of the phenomenon. A stronger focus
on sustaining peace, particularly in support given to
conflict-prevention initiatives at the national, regional
and international level, will also directly help to stem
the tide of human trafficking.

Thirdly and lastly, we must take a gendered
approach in responding to human trafficking. Human
trafficking, forced labour and modern slavery force
people into circumstances that no human being should
have to endure. The effects on women and girls can
be particularly harrowing. The New York Declaration
on Refugees and Migrants (General Assembly resolution 71/1) commits all States to ensuring that our
responses to large movements of refugees and migrants
mainstream a gender perspective. This does not simply
entail instituting extra security and response measures;
it also means ensuring women's participation in policies
and programmes aimed at combating and preventing
human trafficking.

This issue is a priority for Ireland. Our commitments
are set out in our national action plan to prevent and
combat human trafficking, now in its second phase.
It was developed in consultation with national and
international partners, including civil society, and sets
out a clear, collaborative programme for advancing the
fight against trafficking and enhancing the protection of
victims. Raising public awareness is key to preventing
and combating human trafficking. Ireland also provides
funding to various international and multilateral funds
involved in combating the issue. Preventing human
trafficking is an enormous challenge that requires the
concerted efforts of all involved, and only through
collaboration at the international, regional, bilateral
and national levels will it be advanced.

