Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): Malaysia joins previous
speakers in thanking the United Kingdom for convening
this meeting. The focus on the issue ofhuman trafficking
in armed conflict, which highlights a disturbing trend
that warrants strengthening international action, is
indeed commendable and timely.

Allow me also to thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and Mr. Yuri Fedotov for their briefings and
steadfast commitment to addressing the issue of human
trafficking. I also wish to thank Mr. Kevin Hyland and
Ms. Ilwad Elman for their harrowing and powerful
testimonies. Their courage and fortitude in the face
of unspeakable horrors should compel us to act and
demand to be matched by the strongest resolve on the
part of the international community so as to ensure that
the detestable treatment that they have witnessed and
others have experienced is not repeated.

Trafficking in persons is absolutely unacceptable in
any context. Human trafficking entails the extrajudicial
judgment that certain groups of people - be it on the
basis of ethnicity, faith, gender, economic status, age
or other random criteria - are inferior and can be used
as a means to an end. Human traffickers treat people
without dignity and negate the respect inherent to all
humankind. Such twisted concepts and beliefs are
especially pernicious in situations of armed conflict,
where the vulnerability of civilian communities makes
them prime targets for such horrendous acts.

We are currently witnessing a nightmare scenario
in which non-State armed groups are actively engaging
in human trafficking activities to fulfil their distorted
visions of the world. Da'esh and its ilk have shown
that they are capable of immense cruelty through the
prevailing use of sexual violence, enslavement and the
trade in women and girls for recruitment and financial
purposes. In that regard, the practices of groups such
as Da'esh and Boko Haram in perpetrating sexual
violence, including through the trafficking of women
and children, demand heightened and greater attention
and responses from the Council. We wish to briefly
highlight three aspects that we believe will make a real
difference in tackling the scourge.

First, as with all transnational crimes, strengthening
operations and coordination among Member States,
as well as regional and international organizations, is
imperative. In that regard, we call on Member States
that have yet to ratify and implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its Additional Protocol - which prohibit trafficking in
armed conflict, identify perpetrators and hold them
accountable - to make information and evidence of
acts of trafficking in persons and sexual violence
in conflict available to the Council and channeled
to the relevant Sanctions committee, including the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. We support integrating a
focus on trafficking in persons and the use of sexual
violence in armed conflict into the work of the
Monitoring team of the 1267 (1999) Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
where there are clear linkages to terrorist activities.

At the same time, the crucial outreach and
advocacy roles of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict must be better
leveraged. The securing of commitments and action
plans for parties to the conflict so as to end and prevent
violations and abuses associated with trafficking in
persons, including sexual violence and the recruitment
and use of children, should continue to be pursued.
We call for the Council's continued engagement with
the special envoys, including through the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the various
sanctions committees.

I would like to emphasize the need for victims
and survivors of trafficking and sexual violence to
be supported in returning to a secure and stable life.
Women and children subjected to any violation or
abuse, including trafficking and sexual violence, at
the hands of Da'esh and similar groups, should be
considered as victims and given access to funding and
as the principal foundation for our considered action
to do so as soon as possible. Given the multifaceted
dimensions of trafficking in persons, including where
it is associated with sexual violence and the funding
of terrorist activities, it is crucial that the international
community mobilize complementary legal means,
where available, to investigate, disrupt and dismantle
trafficking networks. We fully support the efforts of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other bodies, as well as bilateral partners, in providing
technical support to Member States to build law
enforcement capacities.

Through our own experience as a country of
destination and transit, we have learned that cooperation
and coordination with neighbouring countries and the
international community are essential to our common
efforts to combat this ugly scourge. Malaysia, as a
member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), is happy that the Association has made a
unified commitment to combatting and preventing
trafficking in persons through the implementation of
the ASEAN Convention against Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and its related plan
of action, established in November 2015. We also
appreciate the strong support for such regional-level
efforts on the part of of the East Asia Summit partners,
as reflected in the Summit declaration adopted
last September.

In maintaining international peace and security,
the Security Council must better utilize its available
tools to monitor trends in humanitarian assistance.
In that respect, community and religious leaders are
pivotal in ensuring the reintegration and rehabiliation
of survivors and in eliminating the stigma that can be
associated with the ordeal that they have been through.
In that regard, we support continued partnership with
civil society to enable survivors and communities to
heal and renew.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Malaysia's
enduring resolve to combat and eradicate trafficking
in persons and our equally strong commitment to
continuing to work with the international community
until we bring an end to those crimes against humanity.

