Mr. Szetre (Norway): I make this statement on
behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.

At the outset, I would like to thank Peru for
organizing this important debate. Sexual violence
is increasingly being used as a weapon or a tactic of
war. We know that domestic violence also increases
as tensions in society grow. The chaos of conflict
often prepares the ground for further unreported and
unprosecuted abuse.

Women are always vulnerable in conflict. Violent
extremists often target women specifically and
strategically, undermining women's rights and security.
Sexual violence makes up a significant part of extremist
violence. Sexual violence is often seen as inevitable in
conflict. We do not agree. That attitude encourages
impunity and silences survivors.

The challenges are immense and include
insufficient protection mechanisms, inadequate rule of
law, weakjudicial systems, poor services for survivors,
stigmatization of victims and witnesses, structural
discrimination and economic and social inequalities.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a violation of both
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. It can be a war crime, a crime against
humanity or an act of genocide. The International
Criminal Court plays a vital role in the fight against
impunity, but States have the primary duty to prevent
and investigate cases and to prosecute the perpetrators.
Strengthening the capacity of national institutions, both
during peacetime and in conflict, is therefore critical.

Sexual violence is eroding the societies we are
striving to stabilize and rebuild. It is destroying the
future as well as the present for many more than the
women and girls, men and boys directly affected.
Preventing and responding to sexual- and gender-
based violence is a priority for the Nordic countries.
In our mediation work, we strive to ensure that
victims are heard and that amnesty for sexual crimes
is not accepted. We are working hard to increase the
number of women deployed to international operations,
because we believe that diverse teams deliver better.
We train all our personnel to ensure that those who are
entrusted with people's lives can in fact be trusted. We
contribute specialized police teams to United Nations
peace operations.

Together with the United Nations, we are developing
a whole-of-mission handbook for United Nations
operations on how to prevent and respond to conflict-
related sexual violence. We cooperate with the African
Union and the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission on Women, Peace and
Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, supporting the life-saving
services provided by the United Nations Population
Fund to survivors, and the efforts of UN-Women
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to ensure a gendered humanitarian response.
We work with Ms. Patten, the Group of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and we support Justice Rapid Response and
UN-Women's training of experts, as well as the Gender
Standby Capacity. Our civil society partners provide
psychosocial and legal support and engage in livelihood
programmes. Moreover, our academic partners provide
knowledge that informs our policy decisions.
The Nordic countries underscore the pivotal
importance of gender equality and women's
empowerment, as highlighted in the concept note
(S/2018/311, annex).

Without the full and effective participation of
women at all levels, we will not be able to prevent
conflict-related sexual violence or respond effectively.
We need a broad, coordinated response. The Call to
Action on Protection from Gender-based Violence in
Emergencies, the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Points Network and the emerging alliance of
networks of women mediators are all important steps
in the right direction. Today's discussion is not about
victims but survivors, who are entitled to protection
and justice. They must be enabled to participate
in rebuilding their societies. Only then will peace
be sustainable.

A longer version of this statement will be
available online.

