Mr. Yaung Chan (Cambodia): Allow me to express
my sincere congratulations to Uruguay, and especially
to you, Sir, on your assumption to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May, as
well as to thank you for organizing this extremely
important debate.

My delegation would like to thank His Excellency
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/249) on
conflict-related sexual violence, as well as his tireless
efforts to improving the plight of victims of these
international crimes.

My delegation shares the concerns expressed by
many delegations in the Security Council today. We are
troubled by the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war
and terrorism. That is a despicable act. Yet that form of
violence is on the rise globally and is well documented.

The Secretary-General's report notes that sexual
violence is used strategically to terrorize populations
into compliance, incentivize the recruitment of fighters
and generate revenue as part of the shadow economy of
conflict and terrorism. Those are troubling developments
that cannot be tolerated by the international community.
The Royal Government of Cambodia strongly condemn
all forms of violence and sexual exploitation perpetrated
by non-State armed groups against religious and
ethnic minorities, especially women and children. The
international community must pay careful attention to
that disturbing tactic ofterror used to do to dehumanize,
humiliate and subjugate entire populations, particularly
women and children. We must strengthen the existing
legal instruments for the protection of women and
girls in armed conflict. To that end, the reports of the
Secretary-General, and other documents that make
recommendations, should be based on clear, accurate,
verifiable data, resulting in reports that will inform our
understanding and actions and thereby help to strengthen
the rule of law at the national and international level.
Furthermore, in order to combat the victimization
of women and girls, we must address the underlying
causes of conflict. Conflict prevention is a prerequisite
for sustainable peace and respect for human rights.
Since the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security lies with the United
Nations, the international community must address the
root causes of conflict in a comprehensive, purposeful
and determined way.

For its part, the Royal Government of Cambodia is
deeply committed to fighting the spread ofterrorism in
all its forms and manifestations and is cooperating with
the Association for Southeast Asian Nations and the
States Members of the United Nations, as well as United
Nations agencies, sparing no effort to address threats to
women's security. In order to contribute to global peace
and security, my Government has participated actively
in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

At times, regrettably, peacekeeping duties demand
the highest sacrifice from those who serve. Most
recently, as those here may be aware and as has been
condemned by the Security Council, a United Nations
convoy in the Central African Republic was attacked
last week by armed elements, resulting in the deaths
of four peacekeepers from Cameroon and one from
Morocco. My Prime Minister has said that non-violence
should be at the heart of every human being, and has
called for peace and strongly urged the Organization
to consider measures that can ensure the protection of
United Nations peacekeepers in conflict areas in Syria.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Cambodia
is resolved to protect vulnerable populations and their
rights in situations of armed conflict. Eliminating
sexual violence against men, women, boys and girls
requiresjoint global action, and Cambodia is committed
to that effort in order to end people's victimization by
extremist groups and terrorist organizations.

