Ms. Kadare (Albania): Albania welcomes this
open debate on such an important theme, and I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/900), as well as the briefers for bringing to this
Chamber the perspective of civil society.

Albania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union,
and I wish to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.

We now have clear evidence that the meaningful
participation of women contributes to the success of
peace talks, accelerates economic recovery, improves
humanitarian assistance, helps counter violent
extremism and prevents human rights violations. Since
the landmark adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), there
has been significant progress, and Member States have
gradually integrated its principles and obligations into
their national legal frameworks.

Nevertheless, a clear gap persists between
achievements on paper and the reality on the ground.
Despite international commitment, the meaningful
inclusion of women in preventing conflicts and
negotiating peace processes is still negligible, and
it is challenged by the lack of access to political and
economic resources, as well as a predominantly
masculine mentality of domestic and international
politics. The facts speak for themselves - from 1990
to 2017, only 2 per cent of mediators in formal peace
processes were women.

In response, we need to strengthen our resolve
and increase the cooperation among Member States,
the United Nations and civil society in order to impact
change on the ground. In that regard, the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network and other
concrete mechanisms such as the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network, of which Albania is an
active member, have great potential to prevent and
resolve conflicts through the increased and meaningful
participation of women.

Albania has made significant progress in adopting
policies relevant to the empowerment of women,
the political participation of women in all levels of
governance and the achievement of gender equality.
I am proud to announce today that in September the
Albanian Government approved its first national action
plan for resolution 1325 (2000). With the support of
our Dutch partners, UN-Women and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, we brought
together not only the Government stakeholders, but also
civil society and women's groups, in order to increase
ownership, legitimacy and sustainability. While the
adoption of the national action plan was an important
milestone, we are well aware that its implementation
remains a challenge, especially in terms of financial
support. In that context we will continue to work closely
with donors and partners and will spare no effort in
ensuring the full implementation of the plan.

In terms of women's participation in political
and public life in Albania, the percentage of women
members of Parliament is 29.3 per cent, with 41 female
members of Parliament. Our current Government, led
by Prime Minister Rama, has achieved full gender
parity, with half ofits members being women, including
the Minister of Defence. In 2017, the number of women
ambassadors increased to 26 per cent and the number
of consuls to 33 per cent, thereby reaching the highest
percentage ever of high-ranking women in the Albanian
foreign service.

In conclusion, we invite the United Nations to ensure
that qualitative gender perspectives are integrated

across all its activities. Albania strongly supports the
Secretary-General's efforts and personal commitment
to placing women at the centre of the United Nations
conflict prevention platform, and also to achieve
gender parity within the United Nations system. We
need a gender equal United Nations to achieve a gender
equal world.

