Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): I have the honour of
delivering the following statement on behalf of all five
Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden - each of which is sponsoring
the draft resolution today.

First of all, allow me to thank the United States
presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this open debate.

Women are often victims of armed conflict, but
they can also play a central role in preventing and
resolving violent conflict as actors in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. The ongoing high
incidence of horrific sexual violence against women
and girls in conflicts demands the attention of the
international community as a human rights matter and
as a question of ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law. It is an issue that has a direct bearing
on peace and security, and it is therefore very timely
and appropriate that the Security Council is addressing
the issue once again. Landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
continues to require full implementation.

It is clear that the use of rape and sexual violence
exacerbates conflicts and also perpetuates them long
after active hostilities are over. Such crimes inflict
indelible scars on individuals, families and societies,
which makes reconciliation and peacebuilding much
more difficult. The scars of sexual violence on the
psyche of the victims, their families, the children it
often results in, and even the perpetrators, are the
explosive remnants of war of the mind, erupting
unpredictably, doing long-term damage and making
reconstruction of a sustainable peace very difficult
indeed.

A climate of impunity on sexual violence
continues to exist. We must all join forces to end
impunity for such crimes. The Security Council should
respond urgently to incidents of sexual violence in
conflicts and bring measures to bear to ensure that
parties to armed conflict understand clearly that they
will pay a heavy price for employing or permitting
sexual Violence. All Member States must do their part
in ensuring that individuals suspected of such crimes
are brought to justice in accordance with the necessary
legislation at the national level. We also call on States
to cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Court, whose Statute explicitly states that rape and
other forms of sexual violence can be prosecuted as
war crimes or crimes against humanity. Amnesties
should not extend to crimes of sexual violence.

Clear guidance for peacekeeping missions is also
needed on how to make operational the mandate to
protect civilians, including women and girls, from
sexual violence. That approach calls for strong and
specific mandates from the Security Council, as well as
sufficient means and more comprehensive reporting by
the United Nations system. There is a need to make full
use of available expertise, including from human rights
mechanisms such as the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on Violence against Women.

All Member States should ensure that training of
peacekeepers includes training on resolution 1325
(2000). Furthermore, it is vital that peacebuilding and
reconstruction plans include comprehensive victim-
protection and support mechanisms, such as shelters
for the victims and their families and gender units
within the police.

A key element in ensuring the protection of
women and girls from sexual violence during conflicts
and in post-conflict situations is the participation of
women in decision-making processes in all areas and at
all levels. Whether it involves practical protection
measures, such as the gathering of fuel in safety, or
more complex issues, such as the reintegration of
combatants into society, the input and experiences of
women are essential to success and sustainability.

The participation of women is therefore directly
relevant to the maintenance of peace and security. In
addition to increasing the presence of women on
military and police forces, new avenues must be
explored on how to deploy more women in
peacekeeping missions, including by establishing
civilian observer components. Stronger efforts must be
made by the United Nations to include women in
discussions on the management and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding, including in rebuilding
societies, security sector reform, transitional justice
and post-conflict political and economic processes.

The Secretary-General and relevant United
Nations bodies should also redouble their efforts to
recruit women to high-level positions. The United

08-3908]
Nations system as a whole should intensify its efforts
to recruit more women at all levels. The same appeal
goes out to all States Members of the United Nations.
It is our responsibility to ensure that the United
Nations has a solid base from which to recruit.

The Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping missions should continue and be
strengthened. There must be no impunity for
peacekeepers either. Again, wider participation by
women in such missions would help. The highly
successful Indian women's police corps in Liberia is
encouraging in this regard, as is the high percentage of
women in the group of Nigerian police that Nordic and
African police have jointly trained for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. It is
also important to provide appropriate and recurrent
training to all personnel involved in peacekeeping
operations, including on ethical conduct and the zero-
tolerance policy.

Regional bodies are becoming increasingly
important actors under the mandate of the Security
Council in addressing regional issues of peace and
security. Such bodies should be closely linked to the
discussions and decisions in relation to women, peace
and security. The Secretary-General is encouraged to
take a leading role in this matter.

The Security Council should seriously consider
the establishment of a working group to monitor
conflict situations where sexual Violence is widely or
systematically used as a weapon of war, as is the case
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan. Such a working group could assist the Council
in reacting rapidly to urgent cases and making
proposals on appropriate actions, including emergency
obstetric and other sexual and reproductive health
services and measures to prevent and treat HIV and
other sexually transmitted infections, psychosocial
support, as well as early measures to enforce the rule
of law and crime victims" access to justice.

We support the proposal made by the United
States in its concept paper that Security Council
mandates should be strengthened to prevent sexual
Violence in situations of armed conflict and provide
greater protection for women and girls from
widespread and systematic attacks by parties to armed
conflicts. This should be dealt with systematically both
when mandates for ongoing operations come up for
renewal and when mandates for new operations are
adopted.

We further encourage the Council to follow up on
the recommendation by the Secretary-General of
developing a monitoring mechanism to improve its
contribution to preventing and redressing violence
against women in armed conflict.

Finally, all the Nordic countries have completed
or are in the final stages of completing national
implementation plans for resolution 1325 (2000) and
encourage other Member States to do the same, as a
matter of urgency. We also suggest that lessons learned
from countries that have such a plan be used in
supporting other countries in preparing their own
plans.

