Mrs. Kosor (Croatia): Thank you, Madam
Secretary of State, for presiding over this meeting
today. I would also like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, His
Excellency Mr. Srgjan Kerim and other distinguished
colleagues around the table.

At the outset, Madam President, I wish to thank
you and the United States presidency for the

opportunity to discuss the issue of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict. Croatia, as a country
which has been exposed to the horrors of war, strongly
believes that the Council must give its undivided
attention to this phenomenon, which poses a serious
threat to international peace and security.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence against
women are heinous crimes that in past decades have
often been used as a method of warfare. The existing
culture of impunity must be overcome. Today, from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Sudan and
Somalia, and elsewhere, women continue to be targeted
by warring parties during war and in post-conflict
periods.

The Council had the opportunity to witness the
plight of civilians, including women and girls, during
its recent mission to Africa. Having been briefed by my
ambassador, I am all the more certain that more needs
to be done by all of us in order to find justice and a
decent life for victims of conflict.

The use of sexual violence creates an atmosphere
of insecurity and helplessness, with devastating effects.
The number of girls in school continues to fall and
women and girls are exposed to HIV/AIDS and are
stigmatized in their communities. The persistence of
rape in situations of armed conflict is a sad reminder of
our obvious failure to provide security and protection
to women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
countries.

Speaking from the experience of Croatia, it would
be remiss of me not to mention what we, Croatian
citizens, have witnessed of this heinous practice. Even
on Croatian territory, in the heart of Europe, rape was
used as a method of intimidation and terror during the
aggression to which Croatia was exposed at the
beginning of 1990s. Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
had been tormented by the same source of aggression,
suffered the use of rape and sexual violence as an
instrument of ethnic cleansing.

I therefore believe it is my obligation to warn the
Council that these crimes must never - I repeat:
never - escape the arm of justice. For this reason, the
International Criminal Court at The Hague, as well as
local courts, must be the last instance of justice for the
victims and a reminder that there can be no tolerance
for the crime of rape.

We are aware that the response of national
communities in conflict areas to sexual violence
against women and girls has been inadequate.
Combating sexual violence requires well-planned
preventive measures at a national and international
level. We are of the view that Governments should
ensure the participation of women from the early
stages of negotiating peace and in reconstruction
efforts. Women must also be given the possibility of
being elected to political office, while support
mechanisms for newly elected women must be ensured.

However, without ensuring women's physical
safety and economic security through social norms,
efforts to engage them in decision-making processes
will not succeed. Due to a lack of such norms, we have
witnessed the assassination of many women human
rights defenders worldwide.

My delegation would also like to reiterate the
commitments set out in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) as well as in Security Council resolution 1674
(2006). Peacekeeping missions must have strong, clear
and goal-oriented mandates, including the
authorization to use force if necessary to protect
civilians.

In this context, Croatia strongly condemns all
acts of sexual exploitation and abuse by all categories
of personnel in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We call upon all troop-contributing
countries to take preventive measures, including
predeployment awareness training, and to investigate
and prosecute all perpetrators of sexual violence.

In the framework of its commitment to
international peace and stability, Croatia is increasingly
involved in contributing to international peacekeeping
missions, currently 15 in all. Moreover, Croatia has
specific guidelines that regulate its participation in
peacekeeping operations. We are strongly committed to
a zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation by
peacekeeping personnel.

Woman's role in peacekeeping is unique,
prompting an increasing demand for its presence. It is
our policy to deploy women to missions, either as
members of the Croatian armed forces or the Croatian
police. Women have been engaged on a range of issues
where the female point of View or their presence makes
a difference, including providing support for civil
society or addressing problems of family violence.

Allow me now to inform the Council about
progress achieved at the national level. Following our
election as a non-permanent member to the Security
Council for the period 2008-2009, we are ready to take
a proactive role in the promotion of the initiative of
safeguarding women's right in conflict situations and
strengthening women's role in post-conflict
peacebuilding. Furthermore, through our national
policy for the promotion of gender equality, special
measures for achieving the integration of the gender
perspective in national security policy and the
promotion of resolution 1325 (2000) are being
implemented.

Also, as a example of good practice between the
Government and the non-governmental sector, I would
like to mention that the Government Office for Gender
Equality has given support to the non-governmental
organization project on women's experiences of war,
entitled "Women recollecting memories: the gender
dimension".

At the regional level, we would like in particular
to stress the experience we gained in wartime. As is
known, among the refugee population more than 50 per
cent of the people are women and girls. In July 1992,
Croatia was hosting 341,000 refugees, among whom 80
per cent were women, children and elderly people.
Croatia provided for all shelter and food, as well as
providing temporary protection status and medical
insurance. Assistance from specialized agencies such
as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF was
valuable. As a consequence of war atrocities, we in
Croatia still host 1,600 refugees from Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Croatia is a part of a region that in the recent past
has suffered as a result of armed conflict. We are fully
aware of the role that both the Security Council and the
international community can play in addressing sexual
violence against women and girls, especially when this
is used by political or military leaders as a means of
achieving political or military objectives.

We believe that the Security Council needs to
provide strong and effective leadership on this issue,
including by taking concrete action when necessary,
with the ultimate aim of eradicating this abhorrent
behaviour.
11
