Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to highlight the importance of the issue
before us - sexual violence - which particularly
affects women in conflict situations and is an issue that
gravely affects human rights. In that respect, this debate
should directly involve the General Assembly. It is also
necessary to stress the importance of combating the
root causes of war and conflict, namely, the influence
of the arms trade and violent actions by the powerful.

The current world conflict scenario has become
even more complicated due to economic dynamics.
Countries in crisis view the arms trade and war as
ways to strengthen their economy. But truly nothing
will undermine human rights and women's rights more
than strengthening the economy through the arms
industry. The total world military expenditure in 2013
was $1.747 billion. The 15 countries with the highest
military expenditure together represent four-fifths of
all military spending in the world.

Moreover, it is a paradox of our time that, although
the growing technological sophistication has not
resolved the basic problems of a large part of the world
population in achieving sustainable development, it has
provided weapons of mass destruction. And there is
still no end to poverty and inequality.

Ecuador is convinced that, to deal with the
fundamental causes of conflict and violence, genuine
commitment is needed to curb the current arms race
and new forms of war and conflict, such as so-called
preventive war, cyber espionage and the involvement of
outside actors in fomenting conflict within countries in
support or defence of their own interests.

It must be acknowledged that armed conflict and
violence are often generated by inequality among
States that themselves have been generally affected by
an unjust international economic system, various forms
of social exclusion, religious intolerance and ethnic
and gender discrimination. In that regard, we must
call upon States to avoid wars of aggression and the
use of force based on alleged threats out of respect for
the sovereignty and self-determination of peoples. With
those considerations, we do not see that the problems
of sexual violence in conflict have diminished, due
to the persistence of a social permissiveness with
respect to violence against women and girls, which,
unfortunately, in many areas of society, has come to
seem almost natural.

Sexual violence is a violation of fundamental human
rights and, in particular, the human rights of women.
International humanitarian law and international
criminal law are dedicated to protecting women from
sexual violence. However, we do not see the indices of
violence against women diminishing this year. As we
have said before, it is the responsibility of all States to
put an end not only to that form of violence, but also to
impunity for war crimes, including war crimes related
to sexual violence, for example, such horrors as forced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion, forced
sterilization and other types of sexual violence.

In the case of Ecuador, our armed forces are
considered to be an institution that protect the rights,
freedoms and guarantees of all our citizens - men
and women. We therefore look at defence as a public
good that integrates human rights, international
humanitarian law, gender equity and multiculturalism
in a cross-cutting manner. This takes concrete form
in the implementation of our gender policy in the
Ecuadorian Armed Forces, which has been in force
since March 2013. The gender policy fosters a change in
the cultural patterns that cause gender-based violence,
through which related subjects are incorporated into
training for all military personnel and the promotion
of educational programmes designed to prevent sexual
violence that are tailored specifically for the training
of troops. The policy has also brought improvements to
military infrastructure so that adequate conditions are
in place for military personnel, female and male alike.

We must also say that in some regions of the world
we continue to undertake peaceful means of conflict
resolution, building a culture of peace and new forms
of coexistence, as well as a clear position for achieving
global disarmament. As members of the Union of
South American Nations and the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, we are contributing
to the creation of a true region of peace. But those
efforts undertaken at the national or regional levels
can be strengthened only by the effective actions
of international bodies such as the International
Criminal Court, which brings the timely prosecution
of crimes against humanity, especially those related to
discrimination and violence against women.

Lastly, Ecuador again insists upon the need to come
up with multilateral and global strategies that fight the
underlying causes of war and conflict and bring to light
warmongering policies, adopting measures that bring
an end to them and subjecting them to international
law. We remain committed to building a true culture of
peace through socialjustice, the fight against impunity,
dignity and equality of women and the good living of
our peoples.

