Ms. Obaid: I shall be reading out a short
statement; copies of a longer text will be distributed.

We are here today to speak about the
unspeakable: the gender-based and sexual violence that
is occurring on a massive scale in conflict and post-
conflict situations around the world. Study after study
shows that the effects of sexual violence linger long
after the event and continue to fester like an open
wound. The injuries and medical and psychological
consequences of such violence - such as fistulas,
depression, post-traumatic stress syndrome, becoming
infected with sexually transmitted infections such as
HIV/AIDS or becoming pregnant as the result of
rape - are generally ignored by authorities or
considered as marginal concerns.

But to the millions of women who are affected by
sexual violence, those concerns are far from marginal.
They cut to the core of their very existence. An
effective response to that violence is absolutely central
to their lives and futures, and also to the future of their
shattered families, communities and nations. That has
been made painfully clear to us in the United Nations
Population Fund as we strive to promote reproductive
health and rights among conflict-affected populations.
It is truly sad and terribly angering to see the
tremendous needs that exist, but it is even more
shocking to witness the response so far, which remains
completely inadequate, even meagre.
While we, the agencies of the United Nations
system, have made progress during the past four years
in devising standards, protocols and guidelines,
including gender considerations in humanitarian and
security policies and putting gender specialists in
place, we have not made similar progress on the
ground. The fact that we are discussing this issue in the
Security Council today reflects the recognition that
greater progress must be made. I thank Ambassador Sir
Emyr Jones Parry, Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom to the United Nations, in his capacity
as President of the Council, for opening this important
debate and for inviting us to participate.

It is time to establish systems of accountability
within Member States and within the United Nations
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
There are several concrete actions that must be taken
immediately to respond to the victims of gender-based
violence.

First, increased political will is needed to ensure
that women and girls receive real protection from
sexual violence and abuse in their homes and
communities, in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons and in disarmament and
demobilization cantonment areas.

Secondly, we must take steps together to ensure
that incidents of sexual violence are recorded, that
evidence is gathered and preserved and that the
perpetrators of gender-based violence are brought to
justice.

Thirdly, we must ensure that police, security,
peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel and officials
are trained to recognize, and respond to, gender-based
violence. We do not need a few women here and there;
we need gender parity so that women in positions of
power can stop abuses of power.

Fourthly, we must provide effective training
programmes for health personnel on how to care for
victims of sexual violence, and we must ensure that
local organizations and women's groups are actively
involved each step of the way.

Fifthly, it is urgent that survivors of sexual
violence receive quality legal, psychological and
reproductive health services to address the horrifying
Violence they have endured.

Lastly, we must take action to implement
programmes aimed at public and community leaders on
the importance of not stigmatizing victims of sexual
violence and take action to empower women and girls
to enable them to seek help and adequate support. That
is in line with the recommendation contained in the
Secretary-General's report to the Council
(5/2004/814). It is also in line with the Programme of
Action adopted in Cairo 10 years ago at the
International Conference on Population and
Development. It was there that 179 world leaders urged
countries to identify and condemn the systematic
practice of rape and other forms of inhuman and
degrading treatment of women as a deliberate
instrument of war and ethnic cleansing, and to take
steps to ensure that full assistance is provided to the
victims of such abuse for their physical and mental
rehabilitation.

One of the most devastating consequences of
sexual violence is the transmission of HIV/AIDS. In
Rwanda two thirds of the women who were raped
during the 1994 genocide were infected with HIV, and
they are dying slow, painful deaths. HIV and AIDS
threaten stability and prospects for security, damaging
social systems that become overwhelmed and
undermining public confidence in the future, resulting
in hot spots of vulnerability and economic and social
decline.

Significant progress has been made in the past
few years by working closely with peacekeeping
missions and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to prevent gender-based violence and HIV.
But much more needs to be done. As speakers before
me have stressed, this massive and systematic violation
of human rights will continue so long as perpetrators
remain free and have no fear of paying the
consequences for the crimes they have committed.

Most important of all, all of these measures
require immediate and sustained funding so that they
constitute a routine and systematic response. I stress
that point because most proposals to address gender-
based violence in conflict and post-conflict situations
continue to go unfunded, and women are paying the
price. If we do not address the issue of gender-based
violence in an effective manner, our failures in the
critical areas of security and humanitarian protection
will only increase in the years to come.

