Mr. Prosor (Israel): I thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2015/203) and Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict Zainab Bangura for her
briefing.

Sexual violence in conflict has become a weapon
of choice because it is cheap, silent and effective.
Instead of bullets or bombs, the perpetrators employ
barbarism and brutality. Sexual Violence in conflict
ruins lives, fuels conflict and causes lasting damage.
The suffering caused by sexual Violence does not end
even if the women are released or escape. Survivors are
often stigmatized by their communities, rejected by
their families and infected with sexually transmitted
diseases, and they are at increased risk for committing
suicide.

For all of those reasons, sexual Violence is almost
universally underreported. For each rape reported,
it is estimated that 10 to 20 go unreported. The great
injustice is that, in the aftermath of sexual violence, the
women affected live in shame while the perpetrators
live free.

I look around the world today and see an epidemic
of sexual violence. The number of victims is so large
and so overwhelming that we often lose sight of the fact
that we are speaking about individuals. We are speaking
about Arwa, a 15-year-old Yazidi girl who was captured
and raped by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIS) fighters and whose sisters are still in the hands
of the Islamic State. We are speaking about Noora, an
11-year-old from Yemen, who was forced to marry a
much older man, who abused her. Arwa and Noora have
been robbed of their childhoods, families and dreams.
Many other girls and women have also been robbed of
their lives. They may have been silenced, but we cannot
be silent.

We cannot be silent when we are told that female
genital mutilation and forced marriage are acceptable
cultural norms. They are not. We cannot be silent when
extremists misconstrue religion to permit sexual assault
and slavery. There can be zero tolerance for barbaric
acts that should have been relegated to the dark ages.

Our family of nations is failing millions of families
throughout the world, particularly in the Middle
East and North Africa. With every passing day, ISIS
militants brutalize and enslave scores of women. Last
summer, ISIS advanced to the remote communities of
northern Iraq, lining up men by the side of the road
and shooting them into mass graves. They kidnapped
thousands of Yazidi and Christian women and girls
and herded them into Mosul's Badush prison. The
reports from the prison are shocking. Women are raped
numerous times a day. Young girls are forced to call
their parents to detail being gang-raped by dozens of
men. The captured women and girls are sold as wives to
Islamic fighters for as little as $25, or given as "sabaya",
a reward for fighters.

ISIS is just one of the radical extremist groups
seeking to subjugate women. There is also Boko Haram
in Nigeria and in Chad, Al-Qaida in Yemen, as well
as like-minded militias in Libya and Al-Shabaab in
East Africa. Those groups seek to control every area
of a woman's life, including how she dresses, how she
spends her days, whom she marries and how many
children she will have.

Sexual violence as a tool in war is not a women's
issue, it is a crime of humanity committed against
humanity. Victims of sexual violence should not stand
alone. All of us - Governments, civil society and
United Nations agencies - must work together to pass
stronger laws, strengthen enforcement mechanisms and
introduce tougher penalties for offenders. If a nation
refuses to prosecute domestic sexual abuse, marital
rape and honour killings in times of peace, then there is
little hope for justice in times of war and conflict.

Our sages teach us that "It is not what one says,
but what one does, that makes all the difference in the
world."

We have heard the debates and adopted the resolutions,
but we have yet to make the difference that we need
to make. The time has come for meaningful action.
The victims and survivors of sexual Violence deserve
nothing less.

