Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, I wish to thank you for having organized this
debate, which not only represents an opportunity to
help Ms. King and her staff in drafting this report and
its conclusions - and we thank her for her tireless
efforts in this area - but it also allows the Council to
send a strong signal concerning the importance we
attach to this topic in our proceedings.

Up to now, the discussion has been very
interesting, and I should like in particular to thank Mr.
Guehenno for his very interesting remarks. It is very
encouraging to see his Department sensitized to this
issue.

The representative of the European Union will
shortly be making a detailed statement on behalf of the
Union. As an associated country, Bulgaria fully
subscribes to that statement.

Civilian populations suffer the most from the
consequences of conflicts. In those situations, women,
children and the elderly are the most vulnerable. They
are exploited and very often deliberately targeted as a
strategic weapon.

We all recall the way in which rape was used in
the conflict in Bosnia in particular. Women and girls
make up a disproportionate number of the civilians
affected by armed conflict. They are subjected to
forcible displacement, human trafficking, torture and
violence, including, and especially, sexual violence.

Women and girls have the unhappy privilege of
making up the majority of refugee populations and
displaced persons, and they remain at risk even in post-
conflict periods, because international human rights
norms and the norms of international humanitarian law,
which are intended to protect them, are rarely applied
to them.

But women do not have to be only victims in
conflict situations; indeed, they can play a crucial role
in conflict resolution and in the post-conflict
reconstruction of a society. Equitable representation of
women at all levels of negotiations is essential in order
to bring about lasting peace and security.

The presence of women in all phases of
peacekeeping missions must be visible and constant.
Although they are still underrepresented in decision-
making positions, women little by little have begun to
participate actively in conflict resolution and in
decision-making. This is an encouraging trend.

We must create the necessary conditions for them
to be greater stakeholders and to encourage them to
participate more actively. It is also necessary to
maintain basic social services, in particular those for
women and children, in post-conflict situations.

Social cohesion, which is necessary to stabilize
States, must be strengthened by strengthening equality
between men and women and respecting their rights.
Reconstruction of democratic institutions and of
political and public life in a country must go hand in
hand with the participation of women in the decision-
making process, for reasons of parity.

Peacekeeping forces must therefore be sensitized
and trained to take into account in their missions of the
specific requirements involved in the protection of
women. Peacekeepers, the military, civilian police and
civil servants all must be trained on gender issues. This
training must be based on the Code of Conduct and on
a study of the Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Discrimination against Women.

In this respect, the remarks just made by Mr.
Guehenno concerning the training of peacekeepers are
encouraging. I would simply add that such peacekeeper
training must be done in partnership with the troop-
contributing countries.

Resolution 1325 (2000) explores ways of
addressing the different experiences of women in
periods of armed conflict and ways of responding to
their specific needs, including the respect and
promotion of their fundamental rights.

Bulgaria sees that resolution as a major
achievement of the United Nations and the
international community. In this spirit, the Council
should envisage specific measures to protect the
fundamental rights of women during armed conflicts
and to ensure their adequate participation in
peacekeeping activities.

