Mr. Medan (Croatia): Croatia thanks Azerbaijan
for convening this important debate on women, the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations, an issue to which Croatia attaches great
importance in the context of further advancing the
women and peace and security agenda at the global,
regional and national levels.

We welcome the report and recommendations of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2013/525), as well as resolution 2122 (2013), adopted
today by the Council.

Croatia endorses the statement delivered on behalf
of the European Union and would like to add a few
points in its national capacity.

In our View, ensuring gender equality is one of the
basic principles with regard to respect for human rights.
Transitions can present opportunities to strengthen
women's rights, leadership and empowerment. It is
crucial to put in place gender-responsive transitional
justice measures as a key element in the processes of
restoring the rule of law and governance systems in any
conflict-affected situation.

Women ought to be placed at the heart of ongoing
political, social and economic developments. Even
though women are widely recognized as effective
agents of peace, the number of women participating
in decision-making in the area of peace and security
remains unacceptably low. Ensuring their equal
participation in decision-making is therefore essential
for achieving sustainable peace and stability. In that
context, we stress in particular the need to increase
women's and girls' access to education. There can be no
development and stability in any society, in particular
war-affected and post-conflict ones, if girls and women
have no access to education.

Owing to discriminatory legal frameworks and
practices, women and girls are more vulnerable to
conflict-related violations of their rights, including
sexual violence. It is of Vital importance that the culture
of impunity that still prevails with regard to such crimes
be addressed. Based on our own tragic experiences of
the aggression on Croatia in the 1990s, during which
rape was used as a method of intimidation and terror,
we are convinced that the issue of sexual violence in
conflict can be adequately addressed only through a
comprehensive approach. In our View, Victims' rights
and access to reparations is one of the most gender-
responsive transitional justice measures. The Croatian
Government is currently preparing comprehensive
legislation by which the survivors of sexual violence
from the 1990s will be entitled to the status of civilian
Victims of war.

We also welcome the adoption of the resolution
2106 (2013), on strengthening of the prevention and
prosecution of conflict-related sexual violence, and
support the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
As a member of the group of global champions of
the prevention of sexual violence initiative, Croatia
will spare no effort to take a more prominent role in
preventing and combating sexual violence in conflicts.

Despite all efforts, violence against women and
girls still poses serious threats and has no borders or
nationality. The recent adoption of the Arms Trade
Treaty, with a binding criterion on gender-based
violence, contributes to preventing the potential
negative impact of international arms transfers on
women and their rights. Croatia signed the Treaty in
June, and is currently in the process of its ratification.

We believe that greater coordination and synergy
amoang international partners would further improve
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on the
ground.

Domestically, through its national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), Croatia
has integrated a gender perspective into its foreign
and security policy as well as its actions. We attach
particular importance to the involvement of women
in peacekeeping operations. Their presence reinforces
women's perspectives, giving their initiatives more
added value.

Female members of the Croatian Armed Forces

involved in international assignments actively work as
commanders, military observers and staff officers. We
are particularly proud to state that, in coordination with
NATO, in December we will deploy our first female
general as gender adviser to the Commander of the
International Security Assistance Force in Kabul. At
the regional level, we strongly support the adoption
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe action plan on women, peace and security at the
forthcoming ministerial meeting in Kiev.

In September, Croatia, as Chair ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission, organized a high-level ministerial event
with UN Women on women's economic empowerment
for peacebuilding. The main rationale behind this
event was to renew commitment and to sharpen the
global focus on the role of women as agents of positive
change and transformation in countries emerging
from conflicts. We also wanted to invite the broader
United Nations to boost women's economic rights as an
essential contribution to peacebuilding.

In conclusion, Croatia will continue to give its full
support to all aspects of the women, peace and security
agenda.

