Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Indonesia associates itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Viet Nam on behalf of the member countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian nations.

Allow me to convey our highest appreciation to you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
an issue that is of high importance to Indonesia. Allow
me also to thank today's briefers for their informative
briefings made this morning.

As I speak before the Council today, Indonesia
continues to encourage the implementation on the
ground of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security.

Indonesia takes positive note of the Secretary-
General's latest report on women and peace and security
(S/2014/693), which provides valuable insights on how
we can further improve the United Nations presence
and performance in armed conflicts, including in
peacekeeping operations, to the benefit of women
and girls, particularly the survivors of the horrors of
conflict and those displaced by armed conflict.

Indonesia has supported various initiatives that are
complementary to Security Council resolutions that
protect and empower women and girls in armed conflict
situations, including by being one of the countries to
champion the Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict
Initiative.

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights has stated that women and girls
make up half of the refugees and internally displaced
persons in the world. They face certain risks and
vulnerabilities, particularly a heightened risk of
discrimination and violence. Therefore, the theme of
today's discussion - the situation of displaced women
and girls - should be guided by the principles set out
in international humanitarian law.

There is ample evidence that conflict may serve
as an opportunity for women to assume leadership in
the community when men are either in combat or are
recruited into war. Nonetheless, when peace gradually
emerges, so does the return of the gender status quo.
Hence, it is imperative to ensure that women and girls
can continue to enjoy full and effective participation and
leadership at all levels, including during humanitarian
emergencies.

Allow us to share our view on how United
Nations missions can deliver on their mandates in
armed conflict situations, specifically with regard to
internally displaced women and girls in times of war
and during the post conflict period. Allow me draw the
Council's attention to three aspects: prevention, specific
assistance and protection, and women's empowerment.

First, with regard to prevention, integrating the
gender perspective for a more effective and equitable
humanitarian and development assistance response to
displacement and early recovery is important. We should
also continue to promote gender mainstreaming among
peacekeping contingents. In that regard, sensitization
about gender, humanitarian law and human rights
should form a coherent part of predeployment training.

Secondly, recognizing that women and girls have
distinct needs, specific assistance and protection
should be arranged. That includes ensuring that women
and girls have equal access to all forms ofhumanitarian
assistance, providing specific basic services such as
reproductive health and protection from gender-based
violence, and ensuring women's participation in the
administration of shelter and in the formulation and
implementation of assistance programmes.

Thirdly, to effectively ensure that women and girls
can thrive as survivors and leaders in time of emergency
situations, we have to empower them. In that regard,
we need to ensure their access to educational service,
in particular for children and girls in particular. We
need to help improve their effective livelihoods. We
also need to increase strategic educational programmes
that can support women's capacities and skills so as to
benefit them in the post-conflict phase.

Despite the myriad challenges, displacement can
enable women to take on new roles and bring about
positive change in the family and community, provided
they obtain the right and adequate support. We therefore
need to continue building women's resilience and
strength to support their empowerment, strengthen their
protection and promote their meaningful participation
in all decisions affecting their lives.

With your able leadership, Madam President, I
am certain and hopeful that this debate will generate
further significant momentum on the issue of women
and peace and security.

