Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this open debate on women and
peace and security with a focus on sexual violence in
conflict. I would like to convey our appreciation to
United Kingdom Foreign Secretary William Hague,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura,
and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar of Uganda, who spoke on
behalf of the Women's Initiatives for Gender Justice,
for their insightful statements.

We welcome the continuous efforts by the
international community to highlight the urgent need
for effective measures and action to prevent, combat
and eradicate the scourge of sexual violence in conflict.
While significant progress has been made through
concerted efforts at all levels, including by the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence and by UN-
Women, there is no doubt that a lot more remains to be
done, especially in preventing and responding to sexual
Violence in conflict. My delegation therefore calls for
an intensification of efforts to ensure compliance with
the obligations to prosecute perpetrators, end impunity
and provide equal protection and access to justice for
all victims of sexual Violence, particularly women and
girls.

The Government of Uganda has taken a
comprehensive approach aimed at enhancing women's
empowerment, enhancing their participation and
involvement in the promotion of peace and security, in
conflict-prevention and resolution, in eradicating sexual
violence and in ending impunity. We are committed to
the implementation of the relevant instruments.

In 2008, Uganda developed a national action plan
based on resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and
the Goma Declaration on Eradicating Sexual Violence
and Ending Impunity in the Great Lakes Region
(2008), which complements other national, regional
and international policy and legal frameworks to which
Uganda is a party. The national action plan gave renewed
impetus and resolve in Uganda's efforts toward's the
recognition and advancement of women's rights and
the campaign to eradicate sexual violence. The plan
was revised in 2011 to take into account the lessons
learned during its implementation, including the need
to make indicators more streamlined and succinct for
better monitoring and reporting. The revised plan will
serve as a guide to all implementing actors until 2015,
although it will be reviewed periodically to set new
priorities based on experiences on the ground during
implementation.

We would like to stress the need for all parties to
armed conflict to enforce the prohibition against sexual
Violence through their chains of command and to ensure
that alleged abuses are investigated promptly and that
perpetrators held accountable.

Uganda strongly supports more active participation
and involvement by women in addressing the concerns
raised by sexual violence in conflict, post-conflict
situations and peacebuilding, in particular in processes
such as security sector and justice sector reform. We are
convinced that sexual Violence can be more effectively
combated through the strengthening of national
judicial systems, including by revising discriminatory
laws, simplifying procedures for lodging complaints
and providing free legal services to Victims. We
also recognize the importance of providing timely
assistance, including health services, and supporting
the livelihoods of victims and survivors of sexual
violence.
United Nations peacekeepers and those of regional
organizations authorized by the United Nations have a
key role to play in preventing sexual violence in conflict
situations by practicing zero tolerance within their
ranks and protecting vulnerable populations. There is
no doubt that increasing the number of women recruited
and deployed in peacekeeping operations would make
a significant contribution to addressing the problem of
sexual Violence in conflict.

In conclusion, we must redouble our efforts and
sustain the momentum in the fight against sexual
violence at the national, regional and international
levels, using a multi-pronged approach and utilizing
all of the tools at our disposal. We therefore welcome
the adoption of resolution 2106 (2013) by the Security
Council today as one of the ways of advancing further
action towards eradicating sexual violence in conflict
situations.

