Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by thanking all of the
briefers for their participation and their contribution to
this debate.

Next year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the women and peace and security agenda, which
together we have built over the years. If we look at the
resolutions that have been adopted, we will realize what
we have accomplished. Tomorrow we will celebrate
the tenth anniversary of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We have established monitoring,
analysis and reporting agreements within the United
Nations. We have created the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security, which is a highly
effective instrument that assists the Security Council
in incorporating the aspects of the women and peace
and security agenda into the various mandates of
peacekeeping operations. Advisers on issues affecting
women work to promote a gender-sensitive approach in
missions and when liaising with United Nations entities
on the ground.

But while the Council has produced texts and
developed road maps on paper, it is implementation
on the ground that is most important. To cite just one
example, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict has signed
formal agreements with the Governments of the
countries concerned that represent a crucial step in
overcoming the culture of silence surrounding conflict-
related sexual violence. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, that cooperation framework
has enabled the prosecution of more than 1,000 people
since 2013. Those are genuine changes on the ground for
women who have often endured horrific experiences.

Promoting gender equality and the political, social
and economic advancement of women, based on dignity,
respect and empowerment, remains a key element of the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Two weeks ago, Belgium had the honour to
present a joint statement in the Third Committee on
behalf of 75 countries, on the occasion of the fortieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Discrimination Against Women. That shows
the strength of the global support for women's rights,
and while it is important to respect cultural sensitivities,
it is clear to us that no law, tradition, religion, custom
or culture can justify discrimination against women
and girls.

Like some 80 other countries, Belgium is
implementing a national action plan on women and
peace and security, in fact our third such plan. It includes
numerous measures for improving the situation of
women's rights in conflict areas. Among other things,
in the spirit of seeing our commitments concretely
implemented on the ground, Belgium also supports
FemWise-Africa in training female African mediators.

In April of this year the Council adopted
resolution 2467 (2019), which calls for a survivor-
centred approach. That requires political measures and
financial resources. In that regard, Belgium contributed
€2 million to the Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary
Forms of Slavery. We also support the Trust Fund for
Victims established by the International Criminal
Court, which helps ensure women's access to justice.
In that context, Belgium underscores the importance of
health, and sexual and reproductive health in particular,
for all women. Medical care is what victims of sexual
violence need most urgently. In addition, my country
will continue its efforts to ensure that women who must
make the difficult choice of having an abortion can
do so.

We thank South Africa for its commitment to the
rights of women and underscore that the fight for a
world in which women can show their ability to lead
peace efforts is a fight that can and should unite us all.

