Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): It is my honour, Mr. President, to express our
appreciation for your efforts in steering the affairs of
the Council for this month and for your selection of the
topic of women and peace and security for this month's
open debate. I also wish to express our appreciation for
the recent report of the Secretary-General on this
subject, which is contained in document S/2008/622.

The Security Council's adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) eight years ago represented an
acknowledgment by the international community of the
important principal role that women should play
alongside men, on an equal footing, in peacekeeping
operations, the prevention of conflicts and disputes and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This fact has become clear after wars and conflicts in
many regions have proved that the low participation of
women in those fields has made women and children
more vulnerable to acts of aggression, killing, sexual
violence, mutilation, starvation, forced displacement
and other inhumane practices that violate their rights
and that constitute war crimes that are punishable
under international criminal law.

The United Arab Emirates has closely followed
with satisfaction the efforts made to date within the
United Nations system, at the national level and in civil
society to maintain the gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations. But we note that the
participation of women in such operations continues to
be weak, irregular and ineffective due to the absence of
political will and the lack of necessary resources. We
therefore call upon the Security Council and on all
relevant agencies, funds and departments of the United
Nations to seek to achieve gender equality while
fulfilling their mandates to bring about peace and
stability, establish the rule of law and carry out security
sector reform, all of which are necessary for
sustainable peace and security.

We emphasize the following important element.
First, there needs to be an evaluation and update of the
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
to address weak points, including those related to
insufficient funding for gender mainstreaming projects
and activities to enhance the role of women in the key
areas of prevention, protection, participation, relief and
recovery.

Secondly, there needs to be enhanced cooperation
among United Nations entities, Governments, civil
society organizations and task forces of regional
governmental and non-governmental organizations,
especially regarding exchanges of information and best
practices that have proved to be effective in post-
conflict countries. This approach will ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including
the creation of an enabling environment for the total
empowerment of women and the expansion of
women's direct political participation in mediation and
negotiation processes, peace talks, implementation of
agreements and other humanitarian and development
operations. In our view, for these activities to be
effective, gender balance in all delegations and task
forces is required. In addition, women's interests and
concerns should be prominently included in the
agendas all peace talks.

Thirdly, the important role of the United Nations
and donor countries in assisting post-conflict countries
in funding and implementing projects aimed at
strengthening national legislation and training
programmes in the areas of human rights and gender
mainstreaming should be developed. This approach
will ensure the active participation of women in
various sectors in accordance with national goals and
international standards that call for greater
accountability, improved monitoring and reporting
systems on the status of women, on the protection of
their rights and on combating violence and illegal
practices, including crimes committed by peacekeeping
personnel.

Fourthly, there is a need to develop better
creative methods and applications for training and
empowering women in order to facilitate their
involvement in the legal reform process,
democratization, the drafting of constitutions and
election laws, voter education, leadership of political
parties and participation in local governance and
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts in post-conflict
areas.

Fifthly, there needs to be strengthened national,
regional and international legislation related to the
establishment of commissions of inquiry and national
and international courts that are independent and
impartial.

Sixthly, comprehensive plans for raising public
awareness, especially in conflict and post-conflict
countries, should be put in place in order to promote
the full implementation of international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

Over the past three decades, the United Arab
Emirates has come a long way in advancing the status

of women and strengthening their effective
participation in economic, social, cultural and political
developments. In recent years, and in recognition of
the gender equality called for in resolution 1325
(2000), my country has implemented a number of
training programmes designed to integrate women of
the United Arab Emirates, alongside men, into
humanitarian and civil defence activities, including
military missions abroad that are linked to relief
programmes and peacekeeping in areas of conflict and
instability, with a view to alleviating the suffering of
affected populations. I would cite as an example of
such activity the establishment of the Refugee
Women's Fund to protect refugee and displaced women
and others who face hardship as result of conflict in
their home countries.

Believing that the women of the United Arab
Emirates have an important role to play in decision-
making and strengthening national stability and
security, our Government has encouraged them to
strive for significant and unprecedented gains by
increasing their representation in the executive,
legislative and judicial branches. It has also enacted the
necessary legislation to protect women's constitutional
rights on the basis of gender equality with men in
rights and duties, and has acceded to a number of
international conventions safeguarding the rights of
women, particularly the United Nations Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women. The Government has also enacted a family
code with a view to protecting women's rights and
dignity.

In conclusion, we reiterate our concerns at the
continuing dire humanitarian situation of Palestinian
women and children as a result of the ongoing Israeli
aggression, siege and occupation of the Palestinian
territories, in blatant breach of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and other international
humanitarian laws and norms. We call on the Security
Council to assume its full responsibilities by insisting
that Israel fully honour its obligations under the
relevant United Nations resolutions. If it does not, our
region will remain in a state of instability and
insecurity, which in turn will generate more violence
against women. We also hope that our deliberations on
this item will lead to the creation of a comprehensive
institutional approach to protecting women and
children and to improving their conditions before,
during and after conflicts.
