Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I have
the honour of thanking you, Sir, for your delegation's
fine efforts in the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October, including the initiative to
organize today's open debate on the role of women and
peace and security.

Seven years have passed since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which
established an approach and a clear Action Plan
designed to protect of women during armed conflict
and to promote of their participation in conflict
prevention. However, we are far from achieving the
desired objectives in this area, particularly at a time
when the reports and statistics from conflict areas are
unanimous in the view that women and children are
still the principal victims in these conflicts. In most
cases, they are the main target of combatants and
armed factions and are deliberately subjected to
different forms of attack, ethnic cleansing and forced
displacement, among other human rights violations.

The United Arab Emirates is following with
satisfaction the United Nations Action Plan covering
the period 2005-2007 on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), including the achievements in
the areas of monitoring, evaluation and accountability.
We reiterate that this Plan still needs more evaluation
and development in order to address shortcomings, in
particular those created by insufficient funding for
gender-related projects. Another shortcoming is weak
institutional capacity in monitoring and accountability
and the universalization of gender perspective.

We strongly condemn the prevalence of all acts of
aggression and violence against women and girls in
armed conflict and in post-conflict situations. We
underscore the need for cooperation between the
entities of the United Nations system, in particular the
Peacebuilding Commission, for which the United Arab
Emirates has provided support. We have contributed to
the budget of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well
as to those of several organizations, civil society and
institutions, relevant governmental and regional
non-governmental working groups in order to achieve
full implementation of the provisions of this resolution,
including the full empowerment of women in the fields
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding and the
implementation of development and humanitarian
operations.

If these goals can be achieved, countries will be
helped more effectively to strengthen their respective
legislation and training activities aimed at the
prevention of gender-based violence in armed conflict,
as well as improving the institutional environment for
accountability, monitoring and reporting on the
situation of women and for ensuring their full and
effective participation in political, security and social
areas of activity.

We support the efforts made so far to rethink the
United Nations Action Plan for the period covering
2008-2009 and transform it from a mere instrument for
programming, monitoring and preparing reports to an
effective tool that will promote the role of women in
the five main thematic areas of prevention,
participation, protection, relief and recovery and the
normative sphere. Nonetheless, we wish to stress the
following points.

First, there is a need to fully involve
Governments and civil society in the implementation
of the Action Plan. This is in addition to giving
continuous support and development assistance to
countries emerging from conflict so as to help them
finance their gender-related and human rights projects
and to design and implement comprehensive national
plans involving women, thus empowering them fully
and effectively, particularly in the fields of peace and
security, in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Secondly, we need to adopt the gender
perspective in all peacekeeping operations and other
relevant activities, including women's increased
involvement in decision-making processes so as to
mitigate the negative impact of illegal activities
perpetrated against them, including acts committed by
individuals participating in such activities. We must
find innovative ways of training and application in
order to facilitate women's participation in elections,
government and post-conflict reconstruction efforts,
such as those adopted by the World Food Programme.

Thirdly, there is a need to improve mechanisms
for the immediate reporting of violations of the human
rights of women in areas of armed conflict, including
rape and other forms of sexual violence.

Fourthly, we must strengthen national, regional
and international legislation to end impunity for those
who commit sexual violence against women. We must
also endeavour to establish independent and neutral
commissions and tribunals to prosecute and punish
perpetrators of war crimes and those who commit rape
during wartime.

Fifthly, a comprehensive international system
must be established to provide information to all
Member States and facilitate the exchange of best
practices and lessons learned with regard to
strengthening the role of women in the area of peace
and security.

Sixthly, comprehensive public information and
awareness programmes must be developed, especially
for countries in conflict or emerging from conflict, in
order to promote the full implementation of
international humanitarian and human rights law
protecting the human rights of women and girls during
armed conflict.

The United Arab Emirates has made great strides
in empowering women and integrating them in all
areas of our society, including in the political,
economic and social spheres, as well as in human
services and civil defence. We have also endeavoured
to participate in peacekeeping operations in many areas
of armed conflict, so as to alleviate the suffering of
injured and displaced people, the majority of whom are
women and children.

The United Arab Emirates would like to express
its continuing concern about the dismal situation of
victimized women throughout Palestine as a result of
the ongoing Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory
and its repressive practices against women and their
families. A similar situation prevails in Iraq as a result
of acts of violence and terrorist bombings. Such acts
constitute some of the gravest violations of
international humanitarian norms and laws, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949. We therefore
reiterate our call on the international community to
shoulder its responsibility in the implementation of all
relevant United Nations resolutions. We would also
like to underscore that, without the necessary political
will, those regions will continue to live in insecurity
and instability, which serve to fuel violence against
women.

In conclusion, we hope that our debate on this
item will lead to the adoption of an integrated
international, institutional approach to the issue of
women and peace and security in order to make a
positive contribution to improving the status of women
in today's world.

