Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving me the floor. Kenya welcomes the
leadership shown by Nigeria in holding this debate on
women and peace and security during its presidency of
the Security Council. Kenya also appreciates your role,
Madam, as President of the Executive Board of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women. It is indeed a clear
demonstration of your dedication to issues of
fundamental importance to women and the
international community at large.

There is no doubt that matters of women and
peace and security begin with women themselves. It is
women who have the strongest and most sustained
voices in championing women, peace in their societies
and security in their lives. Last month, Kenya, and
indeed the entire world, lost a great champion of the
cause of women. Ms. Wangari Maathai, a Nobel peace
laureate, passed on. We will miss her and her courage.
It is with consolation that Kenya welcomed the news
that 2011 Nobel Peace Award had gone to three
distinguished women - Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and
Leymah Gbowee, both of Liberia; and Tawakkul
Karman of Yemen - for their non-violent struggle for
the safety of women and for women's right to full
participation in peacebuilding work.

Last year, we commemorated 10 years since the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 1325 (2000).
That resolution, together with other international
instruments, constitutes the basis for cooperation
among all actors engaged in this field and contributes
to the wider agenda of gender equality and
empowerment of women. The issue that we are
addressing today - women and peace and security -
deserves the international community's utmost
attention and unequivocal support. In this regard, I
wish to reiterate Kenya's commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), together
with the follow-up resolutions.

Prevention is undoubtedly the cornerstone of any
strategy to address the challenges that society faces.
We note with satisfaction the various actions that have
been undertaken by Member States, the United Nations
system, civil society and other actors in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). We believe that countries must
systematically integrate and mainstream women-
specific issues in their action plans in order to tackle
the growing problem of sexual and gender-based
violence during conflict and even in peacetime. In this
regard, it is important that more support be extended to
countries in order to buttress preventive measures and
support their institutions to combat these vices.

Sexual abuse is indeed one of the most pervasive
crimes of our time. It is imperative, therefore, that the
international community support national systems and
institutions - such as the police, prosecution and the
judiciary - to combat this despicable crime. My
delegation wishes to underscore the importance of
education and communication as tools to prevent and
combat violence generally. It is in this connection that
my delegation urges UN-Women to continue
prioritizing education and public communication
within its mandate.

My delegation believes that women's
participation enhances social harmony and inclusivity
and reduces the chances of conflict. Women, therefore,
should participate as full partners in governance
institutions. The new Kenya Constitution has
entrenched women's participation in all aspects of
Kenya's governance structures and social life in
general. Furthermore, the national policy on gender
and development has set up an ambitious agenda aimed
at integrating women into the mainstream of decision-
making processes through regulatory and institutional
reform.

These efforts have begun to bear fruit. Kenya's
next Parliament will have 48 and 16 seats reserved for

women in the National Assembly and the Senate,
respectively, in addition to those who will be
competitively elected in the various constituencies.
Furthermore, in all cases where special interests are
represented in the legislature, the seats will be divided
equally between men and women. Currently, women
serve as members of constitutional commissions, such
as the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the
Commission on the Implementation of the Constitution
and the Public Service Commission, to name just a
few. Additionally, the top two positions of any public
body cannot be held by people of the same gender, thus
giving an equal chance to women to either lead or
eventually ascend to the top leadership positions of all
public institutions.

As I have intimated before, Kenya condemns all
forms of violence against women, including sexual
violence, and has consistently urged compliance with
humanitarian and human rights law during times of
conflict. Issues of peace and security cannot be dealt
with in isolation from other themes. Women must have
access to resources, entrepreneurial skills, including
job creation, and land, housing and property. It
behooves us, therefore, to emphasize a multi-pronged
approach to eliminating violence against women.

The Security Council has an important role to
play in dealing with peace and security matters
internationally. States, however, bear the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens from violence. It
is in this regard that my delegation calls for more
concerted efforts by the international community and
the United Nations system to support national efforts to
prevent and address the myriad issues surrounding
conflicts. Indeed, countries in conflict and those
recently emerging from conflict have unique
challenges that, if not comprehensively addressed, will
lead to either a continuation or a relapse into conflict.

Finally, Kenya expresses its gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2011/598*) on this agenda item, which, inter alia,
showcases the key sectors where tangible progress has
been made by countries, and identifies gaps and
challenges in implementation. Kenya is particularly
grateful for the thematic indicators under which
Member States reports were compiled. My delegation
will seek to engage further with all Member States and
stakeholders in order to see to it that the indicators
achieve the widest possible acceptance.
In conclusion, I wish to once again reiterate
Kenya's commitment to implementing resolution 1325
(2000). In so doing, we must ensure greater coherence
and coordination in addressing women's issues in
conflict and post-conflict situations in a holistic
manner. I emphasize once again that the establishment
of UN-Women accords us a very strong platform for
addressing issues affecting women in general, and the
acceleration of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in particular. It is Kenya's expectation that
UN-Women will rise to the challenge expeditiously.

