Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to join others in underlining the importance
of the issue we are discussing today. Allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse must be taken extremely
seriously. They are directly relevant to the conduct of
operations authorized by the Security Council, and
they undermine the essential work being carried out in
peacebuilding areas. They also affect the wider image
and credibility of the United Nations. I believe that
they demonstrate why we have what others have
described as an obligation - a moral imperative - to
pursue these issues vigorously in all the relevant
organs of the United Nations system and to tackle all
aspects of the problem through comprehensive
policies, including, crucially, the provision of support
to victims.

The United Kingdom fully supports the statement
to be made later this morning by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to begin by recognizing the vital role
that United Nations peacekeeping operations have
played for decades in bringing peace and stability to
countries emerging from war. The United Kingdom
further recognizes that the large majority of the women
and men who serve in United Nations peacekeeping
operations do so with the utmost professionalism and
dedication and in some cases, sadly, make the ultimate
sacrifice.

The United Kingdom shares the deep concern
over the allegations of sexual misconduct by United
Nations peacekeeping personnel in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in 2004 and 2005. We condemn,
in the strongest terms, all acts of sexual exploitation
and abuse by whomsoever and wherever they are
committed. So we strongly support the action of the
Secretary-General to implement his zero-tolerance
approach in all United Nations missions.

It follows that we welcome the comprehensive
report (A/59/710) on sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations peacekeeping personnel, which
contained detailed recommendations on tackling this
issue and reiterated the importance of urgent action on
sexual exploitation and abuse. I want to pay particular
tribute to Ambassador Zeid for his continuing and
dedicated work. We must all work together to see that
the recommendations of his report are fully and

properly implemented. The test will be whether real
progress is made on the ground as well as in
committee.

From listening to the Under-Secretary-General, it
is clear that progress is being made. That fact owes a
great deal to his personal leadership in addressing
openly this acute problem and in trying to make sure
that comprehensive policies are put in place to tackle
all aspects of sexual exploitation and abuse. We
particularly welcome the fact that uniform standards
have now been implemented for all civilian and
uniformed personnel contracted by the United Nations.
We also welcome the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to finalize the draft
model memorandum of understanding, and we hope
that the General Assembly can adopt it before the end
of its sixtieth session.

Furthermore, we welcome the progress that has
been made in the area of training and, in particular, in
the mandatory sexual exploitation and abuse module
that has now been introduced, as well as progress on
welfare and recreation, which is an essential element of
making sure that troops actually behave themselves in
theatre.

But while there has been some progress in
tackling some progress in tackling this difficult and
sensitive issue, sexual exploitation and abuse remains a
significant problem in many missions. Both DPKO and
troop-contributing countries need to do much more to
implement the decisions taken at the 2005 session of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to
enforce the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy.

Let me be clear: it is a shared responsibility of
the Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Secretariat, the Special Representative - whoever he
or she may be - in theatre and, crucially, the troop-
contributing countries to ensure that we tackle and
eradicate this problem. If we fail to do so, we will do
nothing less than risk the success of missions and
jeopardize United Nations peacekeeping in general.

It is also the case that the widespread
mainstreaming of gender into all policies and
programmes at the national and international levels is
also a crucial factor in the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse. We must therefore do justice to
resolution 1325 (2000), ensuring that women are full
and equal participants in peace processes and, through
that, that we help better to create sustainable peace. For
its part, the United Kingdom has, since the publication
of the comprehensive report (A/59/710), worked with
the Secretariat and major troop-contributing countries,
as appropriate, to ensure that all the recommendations
are implemented.

The United Kingdom is systematically looking
for opportunities to ensure that language against sexual
exploitation and abuse is included in Security Council
resolutions, in peacekeeping mandates and in reports at
both the United Nations and other international
organizations. For our part, the Ministry of Defence in
London provides training on gender, child-protection
and human rights issues to all United Kingdom military
personnel embarking on peacekeeping or similar
overseas missions. I recommend that to colleagues as a
necessary step as part of information-sharing and
putting responsibility where it properly belongs.
Nationally, of course, we also take action in those
cases where members of our military contingents are
alleged to have been involved in any misbehaviour; the
test is how those cases are then followed up and
tackled.

In addition to the support already provided to the
Secretariat and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), we aim, at the next session of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, to
encourage other member States to support the
establishment of conduct and discipline units as a full-
time dedicated capacity. This would ensure that work
undertaken by those units has a long-lasting impact on
the situation. We also encourage Special Committee
endorsement of the participation of troop-contributing
countries in investigations to ensure that any evidence
collected is admissible in a national criminal court. We
look forward to receiving the Secretary-General's
comprehensive strategy for assistance to victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse.

Let me conclude by once again condemning all
acts of sexual exploitation and abuse and underlining
the resolve of the United Kingdom to see the issues
tackled and the problem of sexual misconduct
eliminated in all its forms. I hope that today's
discussion will stiffen the common resolve of the
organs of the United Nations, the Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries to rid United Nations
peacekeeping missions of this scourge. But we should
be conscious that, as the Under-Secretary-General said,
we are only at the beginning of a programme of
systemic and sustained change. A great deal more is
therefore yet to be done. We have a moral
responsibility to do what is needed to accomplish that.

