Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like first of all to
join other colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno and Prince Zeid,
Permanent Representative of Jordan and Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
by United Nations Peacekeeping Personnel, for their
valuable briefings. We commend them for their
leadership and for their tireless efforts in addressing
problems of sexual exploitation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Important observations presented today by Prince
Zeid and Mr. Guehenno confirm that sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations is a
serious problem that can damage the reputation and
credibility of the United Nations and its operations and
that can jeopardize the fulfilment of the mandates of
such operations. We agree that the urgent and constant
attention and determined action of all relevant United
Nations bodies is needed to effectively address the
problem in all its complexity. We therefore welcome
this initiative of the presidency, which offers us an
opportunity to discuss the topic today. We fully align
ourselves with the statement to be made later by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. I will therefore limit my statement to just a few
comments.

First of all, I would like to emphasize that
Slovakia strongly denounces all forms of sexual
misconduct committed by peacekeepers. We consider it
inexcusable that peacekeepers, who are mandated to
protect civilians against human rights violations and
abuse, should be involved in acts that they are
supposed to help eradicate.

In this context, we fully support the
recommendations contained in the comprehensive
strategy to eliminate future sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
elaborated by Prince Zeid (see A/59/710). We also
welcome the priority attention that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) has been paying to
the area of sexual exploitation and abuse. The efforts
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS)
and DPKO, in particular those of the Peacekeeping
Best Practices Unit, have had positive results.
However, we agree that much remains to be done in
that area. The full realization of the zero-tolerance
principle in the field remains a challenge, and is an
important priority.

We consider the preparation of a comprehensive
United Nations policy on support for victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse to be an endeavour of
paramount importance. Its accelerated implementation
in the field will be indispensable for achieving
significant progress in addressing this negative
phenomenon. The creation of conduct and discipline
units in peacekeeping operations is another important
step in the right direction. We appreciate the positive
achievements in the preparation of the investigation
module. However, much remains to be done to make
investigations of military or civilian personnel in the
field fully functional.

Slovakia fully supports the incorporation of
national investigative officers and courts martial into
the investigation processes. We are of the opinion -
indeed, we are convinced - that that step will increase
the number of sexual exploitation and abuse
investigations that are concluded and prosecuted.
Issues such as the legal authority of the OIOS
investigative team, differences in investigative
methods and national rules and transparency are
challenges that need to be addressed appropriately. In
that regard, we look forward to the report of the legal
experts, which will be sent to the Sixth Committee
soon, as Prince Zeid informed us.

We certainly all agree that prevention is the best
tool for avoiding crime or misconduct. That is also true
of cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. In that
context, we are of the opinion that all peacekeepers -
military, police or civilian - must undergo appropriate

training on conduct. That concerns in particular
managers and commanders, who should be very
mindful of misconduct and aware of their own
responsibilities in the matter.

It would be naive to expect sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations missions to be tackled
overnight. It should be our firm commitment to persist
and consistently promote the principle of zero
tolerance and zero impunity for misconduct. The
briefings and discussions today demonstrate the
determination of the Secretariat and Member countries
to address the problem with renewed vigour. We are
convinced that the more attention we pay to these
problems, the sooner we will succeed in eliminating
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse from United
Nations peacekeeping operations. That must be our
common goal and priority.

