Mr. Amit Kumar (India): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative Zainab Hawa Bangura and the civil
society representative, Ms. Saran Kei'ta Diakite, for
their detailed briefings.

Women bear a disproportionate brunt of armed
conflict, even though in most cases they are not
directly engaged in combat. Resolution 1325 (2000)
provides the framework for women to play an important
role in the resolution of armed conflicts through
participation in peacebuilding processes and post-
conflict reconstruction efforts. Allow me to make a few
comments on that important issue.

First of all, the need for greater coherence between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UN-Women can hardly be overemphasized. That is
necessary not only for operational effectiveness but
also for the optimal utilization of scarce resources.

There is a need to avoid making standardized
prescriptions when dealing with situations of armed
conflict. The specific causes and characteristics of each
armed conflict vary, and so will possible approaches
and solutions. United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions should be provided the necessary
flexibility to deal with specific situations.

It is also important to recognize that some structural
changes can take place only in the mid to the long
term. Such changes include the encouragement and
consolidation of democratic ideals and practices and
effective improvements in socioeconomic conditions.
The task of capacity-building and strengthening
Government institutions, including in the areas of
security and justice, is therefore extremely critical to
sustainable peace. United Nations support and guidance
are crucial, but ownership by the State concerned
is equally important in order for institutions to be
consolidated.

We support the United Nations efforts to deploy
greater numbers of women's protection advisers and
gender advisers to its missions. The mandate provided
by the Security Council on women and peace and
security also necessarily requires more resources for
effective, sustained results.

The promotion and protection of the human rights
of women and girls in armed conflict continue to pose
a pressing challenge. There should be zero tolerance for
gender-based violence and sexual violence. All cases
of gender-based Violence must be promptly investigated
and its perpetrators prosecuted.

However, we would urge caution in drawing
generalized linkages between sexual violence and
issues such as the exploitation of mineral resources and
internal displacement, for example, based, as they are,
on specific country experiences, as the recent report
of the Secretary General (S/2013/149) suggests. It
is pertinent to mention in that regard that the report
itself points to the presence of armed conflict as the
consistent backdrop in all those situations. It is also
critical that the mandates given by the Security Council
be observed and that the report remain focused on the
situations of armed conflict on the Council's agenda.
The so-called situations of concern are not part of that
mandate.

While United Nations peacekeeping missions have
provided critical support for gender-related issues in
countries emerging from armed conflict, we agree
with the report's assertion that it is equally important
to pay adequate attention to security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, so as to avoid the risk ofrelapse. There is also
a need for an increased deployment of female military
and police personnel in United Nations peacekeeping
operations and for appropriate training to enable
United Nations peacekeepers to effectively discharge
their responsibilities. India stands ready to place more
female formed units at the disposal ofthe Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for deployment as required.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm India's commitment
to contribute in a positive manner to United Nations
efforts in the area of women and peace and security.

