Mr. Grant (Canada): Civilians sufferdisproportionately
in times of war and conflict, and Canada condemns the
appalling rise in acts specifically targeting women and
children that have become such a grim feature of many
of today's armed conflicts.

Mr. Barros Melet took the Chair.

There is an urgent need for the Security Council
and for all Member States to address the crises in Iraq
and Syria, in Nigeria, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
elsewhere that are brutalizing civilians and tragically
targeting the most vulnerable: women and girls. It is
imperative that both State and non-State armed groups
fully respect their obligations under international law,
and that violators be held accountable.

Canada has strongly condemned the campaign of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) of sexual
violence, which has included staggering levels of forced
marriage, abduction, trafficking, torturing, raping and
killing of women and children. We have also spoken out
in the strongest terms against the terrorist group Boko
Haram's vile crimes against civilian populations. These
have included the calculated targeting of schoolchildren,
the kidnapping, rape and forced marriage of young
women and girls, and the forced recruitment of young
girls to carry out suicide bomb attacks.

(spoke in French)

It is clear that the rise of violent extremism in these
and other instances has had a particularly grave impact
on the rights and well-being of women and children.
We remain concerned that humanitarian agencies have
been facing increasing challenges in gaining access to
civilians affected by armed conflict. In times of armed
conflict and displacement, the protection needs of the
most vulnerable, including women and children, too
often go unmet.

Canada fully supports the women and peace
and security agenda. Women's empowerment and
the protection of their rights not only enhances their
ability to protect themselves, it affects the fate of
entire communities, as women are undeniably agents
of resilience and positive change. We must strengthen
the quality of casualty tracking and the collection of
disaggregated data. We must get better at ensuring
that the work of the international community reflects
what our gender analyses and data collection tells us.
Furthermore, we must ensure that the priorities and
recommendations of the United Nations consistently
reflect the specific needs of women and girls.

It is for those reasons that Canada supports the
United Nations Human Rights Up Front initiative. The
use of the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes
serves as an important early-warning system that
supports human rights by providing valuable guidance
on implementing specific prevention measures.

(spoke in English)

We believe that efforts to address protection
challenges in armed conflict and post-conflict settings
will be incomplete, even impossible, without the full
participation and empowerment of women and girls.
This year alone, we have tremendous opportunities
in which we must incorporate a rigorous focus on the
protection of women and girls in ongoing initiatives,
including the high-level reviews on women and peace
and security and on peace operations and the post-2015
development agenda.

Equality between men and women, the
empowerment of women and girls, respect for, and
the promotion of, their dignity and human rights, and
the prevention of, and response to, sexual violence are
fundamental Canadian values. That is why Canada is
so committed to the elimination of all forms ofviolence
against women and girls, ending child, early and forced
marriage, and the promotion of maternal, newborn and
child health.

We must all do more. We urge the Security
Council and fellow Member States to incorporate the
empowerment of women and girls into all of their work.

