The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, El Salvador,
Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal,
the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, Slovenia, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Viet Nam and Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
individuals to participate in this meeting: Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Tete Antonio,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/203, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual Violence.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/243, which contains a letter dated
9 April 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.

I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.

