Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Permit me to begin by thanking the Ghanaian
presidency for organizing this open debate, which
reflects the Security Council's commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
welcome the overview given us concerning progress
and gaps in the implementation process, as well as the
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2007/567).

Within the framework of a perspective focused on
human rights, Argentina accords high priority to the
situation of women in conflict and to women's
participation in peace processes and in the
peacebuilding phase. Resolution 1325 (2000) is the
legal framework enabling such participation at both the
national and international levels.

From the perspective of the United Nations
system, we believe that we must strengthen efforts to
systematically implement resolution 1325 (2000) in all
areas of work, continuing to mainstream a gender
perspective in all Council resolutions and in the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission. We commend the
efforts being made in that regard, particularly the
development and updating of the Action Plan for 2008-
2009. We believe it is necessary to build on those
foundations and to intensify efforts to achieve greater
impact in the United Nations system and tangible
progress in the situation of women and of gender
equality.

As a result of our own experience, we recognize
the importance of launching national action plans for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Such
plans must be developed through a participatory
process and must include mechanisms for monitoring
and accountability on the part of Governments to
ensure not only that a greater number of women
participate in a country's decision-making processes,
but also that their complaints and needs are taken into
account at all levels of the State, particularly in
institutional reform processes, including reform of the
legislative, judicial and security systems.

In that connection, we wish to highlight the fact
that Argentina has fully incorporated United Nations
recommendations on gender issues into all aspects of
its participation in peacekeeping operations. Last year,
we completed our institutional revision, which
provided women with access to all ranks of Argentina's
security forces, at both the non-commissioned officer
and officer levels. Likewise, Argentine women
continue to occupy an important place in the troop
contingents participating in peacekeeping operations.
For example, we can say that more than 110 women
have participated in the Argentine contingents in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and that
Argentina's first female military observer is currently
working in the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus. Furthermore, the Argentine Centre for Joint
Peacekeeping Operations Training includes in its
teaching a gender perspective in administration and in
the training it provides.

We cannot fail to highlight Argentina's
commitment to combating violence and discrimination
against women and girls. In our country, that
commitment is becoming a State policy whereby State
bodies with competence in this area include civil
society organizations. In that connection, we reaffirm
our support for the Secretary-General's decision that
the United Nations should play a stronger and more
prominent role in efforts to eliminate all forms of
violence against women, as well as for the launching of
a global campaign of the Secretary-General on
violence against women at the end of 2007.

In conclusion, we believe it is imperative to
identify concrete measures to enhance the effectiveness
of our commitment to the situation of women and of
gender equality by ensuring women's participation in
peacebuilding processes and by establishing
mechanisms for accountability at both the national and
international levels with respect to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We believe that an

implementation mechanism within the framework of
the Council, which could be based on the model
adopted in resolution 1612 (2005), on children in
armed conflict, will be an essential and effective tool to
that end.

