Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): Let me begin by
expressing our appreciation to the Spanish presidency
for convening this open debate. We commend the
Secretary-General's dedication to promoting the cause
of women. I thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka
and her team for their dedicated work. I also thank
Ms. Julienne Lusenge, Ms. Yanar Mohammed and
Ms. Alaa Murabit for sharing their experiences with the
Security Council today.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), which calls for women's
increased participation in peace processes, greater
protection from violations of their human rights,
improved access to justice, and measures to address
discrimination. Today we have to reassess what remains
to be done to make our commitments real.

There have been a number of visible achievements
over the past 15 years. Thanks to the Justice Rapid
Response instrument, there are more trained
investigators of sexual and gender-based violence.
The increase in the adoption of national action plans
illustrates a growing commitment by Member States
to implement the women and peace and security
agenda. Five out of the 16 peacekeeping missions are
led by women, and all multidimensional peacekeeping
operations have gender units. However, much more
needs to be done, as a real commitment to the women
and peace and security agenda continues to suffer from
implementation gaps. I would like to underline some
of them.

First, much too often, mediation and peace
processes remain male-dominated. While women are
disproportionately affected by conflict, their critical
role in negotiating, keeping and building peace in their
communities is often overlooked. In Syria, women's
voices remain a minority in attempts at peace talks.
In Mali, only five out of every 100 participants in
negotiations that led to the Accord on Peace and
Reconciliation were women.

What can be done? Education is essential in
empowering women with knowledge, skills and self-
confidence. Unfortunately, in many conflicts, attacks
on schools and the freedom of thought are a common
reality. Furthermore, the development of quota systems
could, in some cases, provide positive impetus for
increased women's involvement. The inclusion of
women in Yemen's National Dialogue Conference was
instrumental in achieving a commitment that 30 per
cent of places in the Parliament must be reserved for
women. In Afghanistan, a quota system ensured that
28 per cent of seats in the Parliament now belong to
women. That gives them an opportunity to influence
major political decisions.

Lithuania has adopted measures to increase
women's representation at all levels of governance.
Consistent and systematic long-term implementation
of gender equality policies and concrete measures,
coordination of actions and synergies of all the relevant
stakeholders led to a number of concrete results.
Women's education rate stands at 90 per cent. Two of
the country's highest posts - that of the President and
of the Speaker of the Parliament - are currently held
by women. Female staff amount to 70 per cent of the
public administration.

Our Government will remain a strong advocate
for women's representation at all levels of governance,
especially in countries recovering from conflicts.
Lithuania welcomes the Secretary-General's
commitment to earmarking at least 15 per cent of all
United Nations peacebuilding spending for programmes
that further promote women's empowerment and gender
equality.

Secondly, the spread of terrorism and violent
extremism has had a horrendous impact on the lives of
women and girls. While images and stories of Yazidi
women being enslaved by Daesh or girls forced to
become suicide bombers by Boko Haram capture our
emotions, we need to go beyond the perception of
women as victims of terrorism. Seeing women as a
driving force in the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism is crucial. In September, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, chaired by
Lithuania, held the first open briefing on the subject
with practitioners from the field. Furthermore, as
the global study research demonstrates, countries
with relative gender equality are less prone to violent
extremism than those where the human rights of women
are not protected. Therefore, all United Nations counter-
terrorism strategies must be linked with civil assistance
and human rights programmes aimed at shaping a
different social environment, averting extremism and
radicalization and tackling the root causes of terrorism.

Thirdly, sexual abuse continues to cast a shameful
shadow over United Nations peacekeeping despite
all efforts by the Secretariat and Member States. We
must act consistently to implement the zero-tolerance
policy with a particular focus on prevention, including
predeployment training and integration of gender
advisory staff in all United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Adequate vetting of personnel would further
prevent individuals with a history of abusive conduct or
sexual exploitation from serving.

Lithuania ensures that all its personnel deployed
in peacekeeping missions receive mandatory training
on gender mainstreaming and prevention. We are also
committed to ensuring an adequate response should
sexual exploitation or abuse occur, that is, bringing
perpetrators to account. We will pursue expanding the
involvement of women in peace operations in both the
civilian and military fields.

Last but not least, as emphasized in the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716), women's
access to justice remains a considerable challenge.
We will not achieve women's empowerment or gender
equality if perpetrators of violence against women and
girls continue to go unpunished. National capacities
to tackle cases of violence against women, including
sexual violence and rape, must be strengthened. The
international community has to support the capacity-
building of Member States as they seek to build
independent, impartial and strong judicial institutions.

Lithuania remains committed to supporting
national and international accountability mechanisms
for the investigation of sexual and gender-based
violence and to ensuring that victims are provided with
adequate support and redress for the harm they have
suffered. The International Criminal Court continues
to be an important mechanism in combating sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict and should be used
vigorously to pursue accountability.

There can be no peace if half of the world's
population is left behind. Women are often at the
forefront of positive change. The Council has an
obligation to act to make sure that this priceless
potential is not wasted. In that regard, we welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which
will improve the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda on the ground.

