Ms. Oda (Canada): On behalf of the Government
of Canada, I wish to thank the Ugandan presidency for
convening this open debate on women and peace and
security, in time to mark the tenth anniversary of the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000).

Let me first say a few words on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, an
informal network of over 40 interested Member States,
chaired by Canada. The Group of Friends has played an
active role in the effective implementation of the
Security Council resolutions on women, peace and
security. On 25 September, Canada, as Chair of the
Friends, co-hosted a ministerial event with the
Secretary-General, ministers from Austria, Bangladesh,
Chile, Liberia, Namibia, Sierra Leone and the United
Kingdom, and the Civil Society Advisory Group. The
event demonstrated the international community's
intention to take concrete, time-bound and measurable
actions on women and peace and security. We hope to
see that come to fruition today.

The Group of Friends welcomes the
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General's
report on women and peace and security (S/2010/498),
including the global set of indicators on resolution
1325 (2000). The Friends call on the Security Council
to endorse those indicators and put them into use. We
urge the Council to establish a framework of
accountability to ensure that it systematically addresses
gaps and challenges and accelerates progress in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). And we call on
the Security Council to ensure leadership on women
and peace and security within the Council.

The Friends congratulate Ms. Michelle Bachelet
on her appointment as head of UN Women and strongly
support the role of UN Women to provide support and
leadership on women, peace and security within the
United Nations system.

Speaking in my capacity as representative of
Canada, I can assure the Council that Canada strongly
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation for
the establishment of an agreed set of goals, targets and
indicators to guide implementation of the resolution
over the next decade. In addition to calling for the
endorsement of the global set of indicators, Canada
calls on the Security Council to ensure that those
indicators are piloted in the field as soon as possible.
Canada looks forward to the Security Council
reviewing the data collected by the indicators in the
future. Such information would be very helpful in our
efforts to protect civilian populations in armed conflict.

For example, that information should assist in the
development of clearer mandates for United Nations
peace operations, which would thereby assist
peacekeepers on the ground in implementing targeted
protection strategies. The data would also assist in the
development of targeted predeployment and in-mission
training for peacekeepers. Canada notes that the
Secretary-General's report points to an ongoing need to
enhance the meaningful participation of women in peace
processes. Canada is pleased to support the work of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women and the
Department of Political Affairs as they work together to
ensure that peace processes benefit from the direct
participation of women at all levels, that mediators
exhibit better understanding of gender-specific
implications of various aspects of peace agreements and
that agreements provide remedy for the experiences of
women and girls in conflict and enable them to
participate fully in post-conflict recovery.

As we said in the open debate on 13 October (see S/PV.6396), Canada is pleased with the Secretary-
General's concrete efforts to redress the disparity in
women's participation in peacebuilding efforts, and we
support the Secretary-General's seven-point action
plan. Canada reiterates the concerns raised in the
review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We encourage the United Nations and
Member States to ensure that the voices and concerns
of women are integrated across the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, through the country-
specific configurations and at the field level.
Canada supports the efforts of Ms. Margot
Wallstrom, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, to provide
strategic leadership and strengthen United Nations
coordination mechanisms in order to address sexual
violence in armed conflict. The recent systematic acts
of sexual violence perpetrated in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo demonstrate the
necessity of Ms. Wallstrom's work. Canada calls on the
United Nations system to ensure that her Office is
adequately resourced and capable of timely action.

More broadly, we strongly support the Secretary-
General's recognition of the need to take effective
measures to address sexual violence in conflict. In this
regard, we welcome the jurisprudence of the
international courts and tribunals, recognizing that rape
and sexual violence can be war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Individuals responsible for those
crimes must be brought to justice. This includes those
responsible by virtue of command responsibility.
Canada continues to call on States to investigate and
prosecute those crimes and to cooperate with
international prosecutions where necessary.

To assist in bringing perpetrators to justice,
Canada supports the Justice Rapid Response Initiative.
This multilateral standby facility gives United Nations
entities and Member States access to a roster of rapidly
deployable criminal justice professionals, who conduct
human rights and international criminal justice
investigations, and undertake special political and
fact-finding commissions and commissions of inquiry,
as well as security sector reform assessments.

Today's open debate is an opportunity to focus on
what remains to be done to implement the women and
peace and security agenda. In that spirit, Canada's
action plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security was
launched on 5 October. Canada's action plan includes
comprehensive and consistent whole-of-Government
action supported by clear national objectives and
performance indicators. The implementation of the
plan will enhance the effectiveness and accountability
of Canadian and United Nations peace operations, and
will help build peace that respects the fundamental
equality of men and women. I would like to share some
activities that we will carry out in implementing
Canada's action plan.

We will ensure that our non-governmental
partners delivering Canadian humanitarian assistance
have codes of conduct concerning sexual exploitation
and abuse. We will develop training modules that
address prevention and protection issues on the
women, peace and security agenda for Government of
Canada personnel deployed to peace operations, fragile
States or conflict-affected situations. We will also
identify Canadian specialists with expertise in issues
related to women and peace and security who may be
called on to support future peace operations, including
peace processes.

Much has been achieved in the 10 years since
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted. However, much
remains to be done. Through our commitment to acting
and to being accountable for our actions, we can move
forward together to ensure that all members of the
international community - women and men, girls and
boys - participate equally and benefit from our work.

