Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President,
allow me at the outset to congratulate the Kingdom of
Spain on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month and to wish it every success in
carrying out its duties. I should like also to thank the
Russian Federation for its outstanding presidency of the
Council last month.

I wish to express my gratitude for the opportunity
provided us to deliver a statement on this important
issue, especially given the difficulties facing women
in general and Iraqi women in particular in the face
of the escalating waves of terrorism that our country
sweeping through our country.

I congratulate Spain on the work it did in
connection with the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015) this morning. The constitutional and legal
empowerment of women will not lead to any fruitful
results unless we condemn all fatwas that permit the
enslavement and forced marriage of women and girls,
the terrorist attacks that we have been witnessing, and
the acts of aggression committed in Iraq by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). There have been
innumerable attacks against civilians of all factions,
all of which has undermined the peaceful coexistence,
sustainability and stability that have characterized
Iraqi society for decades.

The strengthening of the rule of law is essential
to the economic empowerment of women and their
participation in decision-making processes. Iraq has
established four courts on domestic violence and
family affairs. Concerning the legal framework for
women's empowerment, the Iraqi Constitution has
given Iraqi women married to non-Iraqis the right
to Iraqi citizenship for their children, on the basis of
article 18 bis of the Constitution. Women also have the
right to participate in decision-making mechanisms and
in fact constitute one fourth of the members of the Iraqi
Parliament.

1 take this opportunity to urge the international
community to liberate the women captured by ISIL,
who are daily subjected to systematic sexual violence.
I also call on States and the relevant international
organizations to provide medical and psychological
treatment for sexually abused women, to rehabilitate
them psychologically and socially, and to provide them
with the education necessary to ensure their integration
into society, so that they can reassume their important
role in society and contribute to its rebuilding.

