Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to convene
this high-level open debate on women and peace and
security, marking the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). Your presence here today
shows the support of Uganda for the issue. Let me
further congratulate you on the efforts that resulted in
the presidential statement issued by Council today
(S/PRST/2010/22). I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for joining us from far away, which
is testimony to his personal commitment to this
subject.

It is a particular pleasure to welcome Under-
Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet to the Chamber. I
would like to congratulate her on her appointment and
assure her of Austria's full support. We are convinced
that UN Women will play a central role in further
advancing this agenda. We are equally grateful for the
valuable input of Ms. Thelma Awori, representing the
Civil Society Advisory Group on Women, Peace and
Security. Civil society has always been a driving force
behind this issue, and we look forward to further
advancing this agenda in close partnership.

When adopting that landmark resolution 10 years
ago, the Security Council recognized that equal
participation and representation and full involvement
of women in all aspects of peacebuilding and security,
and the protection of women as a group with specific
needs and concerns, as well as the prevention of sexual
and other violence, are not only security issues but also
vital to sustainable peace and stability. With the
adoption of resolutions 1888 (2009), on sexual
violence, and 1889 (2009), on women and girls in
post-conflict situations, the Council now possesses a
strong and well-developed normative framework.

Over the past decade, progress on implementation
has been slow and uneven. The real impact of resolution
1325 (2000) in many areas is yet to be felt on the
ground. All too often, women do not make it to the
tables where decisions that have a direct impact on
their lives are taken in peace processes or post-conflict
reconstruction. There are no issues that are not also
women's issues. Every month, hundreds of women and
children fall victim to sexual violence before the eyes
of their Governments and the international community.
Women and girls with disabilities remain even more
vulnerable. Ten years on, our focus must therefore be
on how we can ensure better and more coherent
implementation of the objectives enshrined in these
resolutions and make a real difference for women in
conflict and post-conflict situations.

The Council has at its disposal a whole range of
tools for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
These include measures such as the mandates of
peacekeeping and other relevant missions, briefings
and reports and commissions of inquiry, as well as
targeted measures and sanctions. We have to be ready
to use these tools and to translate words into practice in
a consistent manner. We have to ensure that those who
disregard the Council's decisions are held accountable.

The Arria Formula meeting of the Security
Council on 19 October, co-chaired by Austria, Mexico
and the United Kingdom, made it clear that we need

more information on progress and on what measures
have been successful. The comprehensive set of
indicators on resolution 1325 (2000), which received
the Council's support today, will finally close this
important gap and provide us with qualitative and
quantitative data on important areas such as the
prevalence of sexual violence and the number of
women participating in peace processes. Such
information will allow us to better guide and target our
actions in the future. We hope that the indicators will
now become operational as a matter of urgency. We
believe that all Member States should use the
indicators relevant to their countries' situation,
including in their national action plans, in order for us
to obtain a truly global picture of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

As a next step, we request the Secretary-General
to include the information gathered on the basis of the
indicators in his country-specific and relevant thematic
reports in a systematic and comprehensive manner.
Without accurate and timely information, it is difficult
for the Council to take appropriate action in areas that
need our urgent attention, such as the prevention of
sexual violence. We hope the Council will in the future
also receive briefings on situations where data gathered
through the indicators suggests an outbreak of violence
against women or further deterioration of a situation.
Early warning and prevention are still the best
protection by far.

The issue of women and peace and security
should be on the agenda of the Council every time the
Council considers a country situation or a relevant
thematic issue. The establishment of an informal expert
group would have further enabled the Council to
evaluate information on the situation of women and
girls in conflict situations around the globe. We hope
that the Council will revert to this question in the near
future, once the indicators are fully operational. The
Security Council has to show active leadership and
shoulder its responsibility for implementing resolution
1325 (2000).

The high-level event on resolution 1325 (2000)
organized by Canada in the margins of the General
Assembly's general debate has already provided us
with an opportunity to make concrete and measurable
commitments to implement the resolution. On that
occasion I announced some Austrian contributions, and
today I would like to add more. Due to limited time, I
will highlight only a few commitments; I refer the
Council to the written version of my statement for
further details.

At the national level, Austria will take the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) as an
opportunity to revise our national action plan,
incorporate the crimes listed in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, including gender crimes,
into the Austrian Criminal Code, improve
pre-deployment training of the Austrian armed forces
on gender relations and the role and participation of
women.

At the international level, Austria will provide
active support for UN Women, work together with
partner countries in the context of a twinning project to
support national action plans on resolution 1325
(2000), deploy gender experts and make available
immediate response personnel to address women's and
girls" needs.

Finally, let me reiterate my hope that the
commitments for action will not be a one-time effort
limited to the tenth anniversary. We are ready to follow
up on our commitments and review progress in
implementation on an annual basis at the open debates
on women and peace and security.

