Mr. KyaW Tin (Myanmar): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to express our appreciation to the
Rwandan presidency for organizing this open debate on
the important issue of women and peace and security.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict Zainab Hawa Bangura,
and the representative of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Keita Diakite, for
their informative briefings this morning.

My delegation takes the floor to add its voice in
condemning all form of violence against women and
girls in armed conflicts. Since the adoption of the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000), 13 years ago, there
has been a growing recognition that gender equality
plays an integral part in advancing development and
peace and security, and that women can make valuable
contributions to conflict resolution and in rebuilding
their communities.

This year's report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/l49) not only highlights several concerns on
violence against women, but also refers to the practice
of forced marriage by certain armed forces and to the
links between sexual violence and the illicit extraction
of natural resources.

We thank the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for its consultations with our
Mission in the process of preparing the annual report.
However, my delegation regrets that the report still refers
to our country, along with parties to armed conflict
credibly suspected of committing or being responsible
for such acts of violence, although Myanmar is making
substantial progress in national reconciliation and
bringing an end to conflicts with virtually all ethnic
armed groups. The report does, however, acknowledge
the fact that the allegations that have been received have
not been independently verified due to limited access.

Armed conflicts could naturally breed violence,
especially against vulnerable groups. At the same
time, such situations could also be exploited to make
up or inflate stories of violence by either side of a
conflict for its own agenda. Objectivity and accuracy
are of the utmost importance in the reporting exercise,
especially when dealing with sensitive issues. A few
isolated incidents committed by certain individuals
cannot always be construed as the policy of a certain
Government or institution. The most important issue
in this connection is to have proper legal action taken
against any perpetrator.

Women in Myanmar are protected by culture,
religion and laws. Myanmar's tradition and culture,
which abhor the sexual exploitation of women, strongly
contribute to our national efforts to promote gender
equality and to reduce sexual violence against women
and girls. Gender-based violence is being addressed
through legal action against all perpetrators, regardless
of whoever commits the crime. Members of the armed
forces have to observe not only the penal code but also
the military's code of conduct. We fully support a zero-
tolerance policy with regard to violence against women
and girls.

The best way to ensure the protection of women
and children in armed conflicts is to put a speedy
end to such conflicts. The new Government has
made unprecedented strides in its efforts at national
reconciliation, resulting in establishing ceasefire
agreements with all but one ethnic group. Peace talks
with the remaining group are also gaining momentum.
We are confident that lasting peace will soon prevail in
every corner of our country. Such developments will do
away with the alleged violence against women in the
dwindling areas of conflict.

As Myanmar moves towards to an open society,
the press and media are enjoying greater freedom.
The newfound media freedom is helping our efforts
in addressing violence against women through
independent monitoring and reporting. In addition, a
complaint mechanism to report such abuses is also being
put in place by our national human rights commission.
As a member of the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women, Myanmar is also
implementing a lO-year national strategic plan for the
advancement ofwomen and is in the process of drafting
a law on violence against women.

I would like to voice our support for the Secretary-
General's assertion that Members States bear the
primary legal and moral responsibility for preventing
and addressing conflict-related violence. My delegation
would like to conclude by reaffirming its commitment
to enhance its efforts for the prevention and elimination
of violence against women in conflict areas through
strong legal action and national reconciliation.

