Mrs. Borges (Timor-Leste): Allow me first to
thank your delegation, Madam President, for having
organized this important open debate. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his participation
today. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General and
Executive Director of UN-Women, Michelle Bachelet,
and the President of the Economic and Social Council,
Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe, for their informative
briefings. I would also like to thank Ms. Orzala Ashraf
Nemat from the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security for her contribution today. Timor-
Leste welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security (S/2011/598*).

Resolution 1325 (2000) represents a watershed
moment in the international community's approach to
conflict and its resolution. It recognizes the
disproportionate impact that conflict has upon women
and children, the vital role women play in maintaining
and sustaining peace, as well as the need to engage
women across all sectors, starting from the very
beginning of the peace process. However, as noted in
the Secretary-General's report, progress has been both
slow and uneven. More than 10 years have passed
since resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, and efforts
to fully implement the resolution must be accelerated
in order to protect the most vulnerable groups.

Women's participation in mediation and
negotiation is critical and is directly proportionate to
the level of rights and opportunities that women
experience during peacebuilding. Having women
mediators appointed to senior positions at the forefront
of international efforts in peacebuilding would send a
strong message and would also ensure that the needs of
vulnerable groups are not forgotten. Timor-Leste
supports the Secretary-General's call that women be
appointed to senior mediatory positions.

Timor-Leste recognizes the vital role that women
played, both in our independence movement and in
their contribution to peace through our nation-building
efforts. We are committed to gender equality and the
empowerment of women. We are currently in the
process of drafting a national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000). Efforts are already under way to promote
that resolution and to raise awareness of gender-based
violence, human rights and peacebuilding through the
training of women's groups, survivors of violence, men
and youth. Community mediators, 50 per cent of whom
are women, have been trained to assist in situations
involving local conflict. Involving women at the outset
has had an exponentially beneficial effect in Timor-
Leste and has laid the foundation for women's
participation and inclusion, not only in Government,
but also across all sectors.

We are proud to note that women's representation
in our Parliament is at 29 per cent, and we have set a
goal to reach 35 per cent representation by 2015. The
recently adopted electoral law requires that every third
candidate on party lists be a woman, thereby ensuring
that this target will be reached.

UN-Women, together with international partners,
has provided great support to our efforts to promote
gender equality and the empowerment of women. As a
member of the Executive Board of UN-Women, we are
steadfast in our support of the new entity and are
confident of the value of its work on the advancement
of women. That commitment is further reflected in our
three-year contribution to the core budget of
UN-Women.

According to the World Bank, women and girls
with disabilities are three times more likely to be
victims of gender-based violence. Periods of conflict
increase the number of those afflicted with long-term
physical, mental or sensory impairments, leaving a
larger group of women and children who are disabled
and often targeted by abuse and violence. In
mainstreaming gender into the area of peace and
security, the needs of those with disabilities should not
be forgotten. Moreover, in creating plans for post-
conflict service delivery, it is important to remember
that those with disabilities may require different or
specialized services, and to plan accordingly. In that
regard, it is important that women with disabilities are
factored accordingly into national action plans on
resolution 1325 (2000).

It is necessary to stress the importance of making
resources available to women's organizations, which
can be utilized to shed light on the needs of women and
children during and after conflict, but also as a tool in
peacebuilding. The innovative cross-learning initiative
on resolution 1325 (2000) involving Ireland, Liberia
and Timor-Leste is an example of such a dialogue. It
was designed to draw upon the experiences of those
directly affected by conflict, thereby enabling them to
discuss the most critical issues facing women and girls
in conflict and post-conflict settings, as well as the
challenges that remain in post-conflict rebuilding.

Finally, improving coordination and sequencing
will enable the United Nations system to address the
needs of all women, including those with disabilities,
in peace and security. We welcome the formation of the
High-level Steering Committee on Women and Peace
and Security , and look forward to its work. We are
also encouraged by the increase in the number of
Security Council reports addressing the issue of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations, along
with the mission mandate renewal resolutions on that
issue. We hope that they will act as an impetus for the
delivery of results on gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls.

Peace and security measures must be approached
with a long-term vision that encompasses prevention,
participation and protection. This year's Nobel Peace
Prize winners, Liberian President Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf, Yemeni activist Tawakkul Karman and Liberian
activist Leymah Gbowee highlight the important role
that women play in the peace process. In that regard, I
would like to pay tribute to the four women peace
advocates who were recently presented with the
inaugural N-Peace Awards in Asia, including
Ms. Filomena Barros dos Reis of Timor-Leste, for their
contributions to peacebuilding in their communities at
the grass roots and national levels. Let us take
inspiration from those women and use their efforts as a
catalyst in our efforts to implement resolution 1325
(2000).

