Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for raising this
important issue, and the Secretary-General, Mr. Hyland,
Mr. Fedotov and Ms. Elman for their briefings and
forceful calls to end all forms of modern slavery. The
United States appreciates all of the work they have done
to help move us towards that goal.

Rama was looking for a better life. A young woman
in war-torn Syria, Rama was working in a cafe when
a man offered her a restaurant job in Lebanon with a
much higher salary. She jumped at the opportunity,
but instead of taking her to the well-paying job he had
promised, the man took Rama to a run-down brothel in
a slum. Over the next nine months, she was beaten and
forced into prostitution, one of as many as 75 women
caught up in one of Lebanon's largest sex-trafficking
rings. As Rama told a reporter,

"We slept where we worked The windows were
painted black. We couldn't see the light or breathe
the air outside."

Describing her captor, the ringleader of the trafficking
operation, she said,

"It's not that he made us feel like slaves. We were
actual slaves He beat me until I surrendered".

Rama eventually escaped that horror, but she is
physically and emotionally shattered.

And Rama is not alone. Sadly, her experience is far
more common than most of us realize. An estimated
21 million people in more than 106 countries, including
countless children, have been reported trapped in
modern slavery. That is more than the population of
Romania. Those are people living in some of the most
horrifying conditions imaginable. We see children
forced to make bricks in Peru, or disentangle fishing
nets in Ghana, or who are sold into prostitution in South-
East Asia. We see men held captive on fishing boats off
the coast of Thailand, and women trapped as domestic
workers in the Persian Gulf. No country is immune to
this crisis, and that includes the United States, where,
despite our efforts to combat human trafficking, too
many people are still falling victim to criminals who
force them into prostitution or other types of work, with
no pay and no way out.

This is notjust an issue ofhuman dignity, it can also
be one ofpeace and security. The groups responsible for
human trafficking are all too often the same ones that
send weapons and narcotics across our borders, or they
are terrorist organizations that finance their attacks
by smuggling desperate people. According to the
non-governmental organization Human Rights First,
traffickers earn an estimated $150 billion every year.
That is big money, and it is money that frequently ends
up supporting illegal activities that we all want to stop.
And the problem is only getting harder to solve. Today,
criminal gangs take advantage of technology to prey on
people, putting fake job ads online and reaching out on
social media to lure people into trafficking rings. When
criminals want to sell the people they have enslaved,
they can again turn to the Internet to find buyers more
easily and with less risk of detection. Law enforcement
often lacks the resources and training to enable it to
penetrate such online networks and find the people who
need help.

We must do better. Standing up to modern slavery
and forced labour is a core element of foreign policy.
It demonstrates our unwavering commitment to human
rights and to the fact that all people, regardless of
where they come from, have the right to life, liberty
and the pursuit of happiness. That is why, each year, the
United States Department of State produces a dedicated
report on trafficking in persons, along with an annual
human rights report, the latest of which has just been
released. Both reports reflect our ongoing commitment
to advancing human dignity. I would urge everyone
here to read them and act on their recommendations
for helping to promote accountability for violations
and abuses. A few weeks ago, President Trump made it
clear that his Administration will focus on ending the
horrific practice of human trafficking. Our Government
already has many people working on the problem, but
we will be devoting even more resources to the fight.

There are many proposals out there on how we
can help. Our briefers have already discussed several
important initiatives, including some within the United
Nations system, but I want to focus on just one new
effort. In the coming weeks, the Department of State
will launch an open and competitive process to fund
transformational projects aimed at reducing the
prevalence of modern slavery under a new initiative,
the Program to End Modern Slavery, which was
recently signed into law, thanks in large part to the
tireless efforts of United States Senator Bob Corker.
The initiative will seek to raise $1.5 billion to help
countries break trafficking rings and support survivors.
The funding will come partly from the United States
Government, but unlike most assistance programmes,
it will seek to raise most of its money from partners
in foreign Governments and the private sector. That
is important, because ending modern slavery must be
a collective effort. The new initiative will also spend
its money on programmes that show results. Groups
that receive funding must set measurable goals and
target a 50 per cent reduction in modern slavery for
the population they will be working with. The United
States will lead in rallying donors to that new effort
and identifying innovative programmes that do the
most good.

We cannot forget that when we help people trapped
in modern slavery, we help restore human potential.
At the State Department, for example, we now have
an advisory council on human trafficking, with 11
members who help advise the federal Government
on improving anti-trafficking policies. Some of them
manage businesses, while others work in law firms
or have founded non-governmental organizations.
But what all 11 of them have in common is that they
themselves are survivors of human trafficking. They
now dedicate their time and energy to keeping others
from suffering. Their stories are a testament to what
every man, woman and child can achieve when they
escape the exploitation of modern slavery. We should
give all who are trapped the chance to live their lives
and live up to their potential. The United States is
determined to join with other Member States in order
to make those efforts successful.

