Ms. Napaul (Mauritius): Thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting today. On behalf
of my delegation, I wish to thank the Secretary-General
for introducing personally the report on the results of
the study on the impact of armed conflict on women
and girls and on the role of women in peace-building
and the gender dimensions of peace processes and
conflict resolution. Our delegation found the
observations very useful, and we support the
recommendations fully.

This week we mark the second anniversary of
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Indeed, much has
been done to bring into focus the problems faced by
millions of women and girls in armed conflicts
throughout the world. However, despite increased
attention to that issue, the daily lives of women and
girls in armed conflict areas have not improved to the
extent we would wish them to have. We have yet to see
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We welcome the concrete and practical
recommendations in the report before us. We would
wish all of them to be implemented as quickly as
possible, but, to be practical, perhaps the Council needs
to prioritize them in such a way that we could
implement those that would show immediate results.
The increase in the participation of women in all
aspects of peace operations, among international staff
and particularly at the highest levels of decision-
making, has been identified as a priority and should be
implemented immediately. In that regard, the
Secretary-General's intention of setting concrete
targets to appoint women as his special representatives
and special envoys, with a view to gender parity by
2015, is praiseworthy. We hope that Member States
will seize that opportunity and will submit nominations
of qualified women for those posts.

The Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which is currently
looking into ways of enhancing the role of special
representatives of the Secretary-General, has made a
recommendation for the appointment of more women
at that level.

There is a need for more women in peacekeeping
missions to act as role models. It is an undeniable fact
that the presence of women in missions helps facilitate
contact and foster confidence and trust among local
women. Concrete examples can be seen in Timor-
Leste, Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina, where
gender units and gender advisers of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo have contributed respectively to capacity-
building among local women. The recruitment of
officers with specific expertise in issues such as gender
bias and sexual violence by the Civilian Police
Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is another positive step to be encouraged.

Additionally, training of personnel of
peacekeeping missions to develop awareness,
commitment and capacity on the relevant gender
perspectives needs reinforcement. We remain
concerned at the limited availability of human and
financial resources, both at Headquarters and in field
missions, to effectively promote gender mainstreaming.
We hope that necessary resources will soon be released
to enable the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to fulfil its gender mainstreaming responsibilities in
line with resolution 1325 (2000). We urge those
responsible to take concrete action in that regard.

In almost all States that have had armed conflict,
women have been denied justice. Crimes against them
have gone unrecorded. In many cases, increased
violence against women has continued in post-conflict
periods, be it at home, on the street or in camps. Those
who have survived sexual violence do not talk about it
because of fear of rejection by their family or
community. They have often been humiliated, mocked
and laughed at during their testimony in courts. They
have nowhere to turn and are left struggling to recover
and return to meaningful community life. We would
like to draw attention here to the positive and important
role played by non-governmental organizations by
increasing awareness and helping to alleviate the
miseries of women in such situations.

With very few exceptions, those who have
committed heinous crimes against women in wars have
not been punished, nor have the women been granted
redress.

We need to put an end to this culture of impunity.
My delegation strongly supports the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to condemn all violations of
the human rights of women and girls in situations of
armed conflict and to ensure that amnesty provisions
included in peace agreements exclude impunity from
all war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide,
including gender-based crimes.

Additionally, judicial and quasi-judicial
mechanisms set up by the Council need to apply
international legal standards in gender-sensitive
matters. It is reported that the two ad hoc tribunals -
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) - have both been
hampered by serious lapses and inconsistencies in the
prosecution of crimes of sexual and gender violence.

In a few cases, women have had to withdraw their
complaints because the Tribunals failed to provide
adequate support and protection, as required by the
rules of the Tribunal. There is therefore an urgent need
to ensure that the interests of all victims are properly
protected.

Central to any transition process is the need to
take account of the different needs of women and men
at all stages of the rebuilding of societies and of the
importance of concrete mechanisms to ensure that all
men and women enjoy freedom and participate equally
in rehabilitation and reconstruction.

There is a need for the implementation of quick-
impact projects for women in countries emerging from
conflicts that will ensure their early rehabilitation in
cases where they have been subjected to severe abuse.
Systematic attention should also be given to the
incorporation of gender perspectives in economic
reconstruction programmes and to the involvement of
women in decision-making. They should also benefit
directly from resources mobilized through multilateral
and bilateral donors.

Finally, words alone are not the solution to the
problems of millions of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict. The Council needs to be updated
regularly on the progress made on the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to alleviate
the sufferings of these women and girls and to
eliminate all discrimination against them.

