Ms. Sison (United States of America): I wish to
thank Ambassador Tete Antonio and, in particular,
Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, for their
briefings on the tremendous challenges that women
continue to face in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the Lake Chad Basin. We applaud this inaugural
joint effort Deputy Secretary-General has launched
with the African Union to draw needed attention and
renewed international impetus to advancing women's
roles in peace and security and development processes
worldwide. The Security Council needs to do abetterjob
understanding the threats that women face in conflict
zones as well as acknowledging that we can better help
countries recover from conflict by promoting the full
inclusion of women in peace processes.

The use of sexual violence in conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has a long history,
and the recent violence in the Kasai regions is the
latest horrific chapter. The United Nations has received
more than 600 reports of sexual violence in the Kasais
since August, including 186 reports of conflict-related
sexual violence by certain units of the Armed Forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
heard reports of atrocities against civilians including
executions of children. Civilians are being mutilated,
burned alive and hacked to death, and the violence
is still getting worse. The violence and ongoing and
egregious abuses have forced more than 1.3 million
people to flee their homes in search of safety.

It is important that the Deputy Secretary-General
has raised these issues with us today. Far too many
victims are suffering with too little attention paid to their
plight. The Security Council needs to act now to stop
this violence, including by demanding that Government
forces cease violations and hold accountable those who
commit sexual violence and other atrocities.
In Nigeria, Boko Haram has ravaged the north-
eastern regions of the country, kidnapping scores of
women and children, subjecting them to slavery and
brainwashing these victims to carry out still more
attacks. In March of this year, I had the opportunity
with other Council members to visit the Lake Chad
Basin and to meet with the displaced in Maiduguri
in north-eastern Nigeria. The women there spoke
movingly of what they had endured at the hands of Boko
Haram. There were accounts of kidnappings and forced
marriage and of gender-based and sexual exploitation
perpetrated by Boko Haram and other armed groups.
And the victims, including women and girls, continue
to suffer enormously from stigmatization and a lack of
psychosocial support. These abuses are sickening; they
should shock us.

Seven years of violence in north-eastern Nigeria
have taken the lives of more than 15,000, forced more
than 2 million from their homes, and left more than
4.7 million dependent on food aid and at risk of famine
in many areas. As the Deputy Security-General has
reported, women and girls who have been liberated
from the traumas they faced under Boko Haram
sometimes return home to their villages only to face
new trauma. This new reality comes in the form of
exclusion and stigmatization from communities that
they once called home. After capture by Boko Haram,
many of these women and girls cannot go home - even
once they have been freed. These women and girls, and,
in many cases, the children born while they were in
Boko Haram's custody, face homelessness and despair,
and these challenges may well linger for generations.
The United States will continue its work with the
Government of Nigeria to root out Boko Haram and
support stabilization in the north-east.

The threat posed by Boko Haram and affiliates
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in West
Africa remains grave, but, as we work to make
progress in the conflict, it also remains essential that
Nigeria continue to work to win the peace. That will
require strengthening Government institutions, in
particular local Governments and regions impacted
by the conflict, supporting economic investment
and development and providing services to citizens
in establishing effective and regionally coordinated
disarmament, demobilization, deradicalization and
reintegration programmes.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Lake Chad basin are unfortunately just two examples
ofa much broader pattern characteristic of the conflicts
on the Security Council's agenda. In an increasing
number of places, when War or conflict breaks out,
women are among the first to become victims of
unconscionable abuse. Fighters often seek degrading
the dignity of women and girls as a central element of
their strategy for repressing the populations that they
target. We hope that the trip and briefing today by the
Deputy Secretary-General will help increase awareness
of that dire and widespread problem.

The United States will remain strongly supportive
of policies that aim to protect women who are the
victims of conflict and that promote the role of women
as peacemakers when violence ends. One suspects
that many of the intractable conflicts on the Council's
agenda would perhaps be a little less intractable if
more women were at the table. The United States will
work to recognize the unique contributions that women
make and to draw attention to their plight when they
are the victims of conflict. Moreover, the United States
remains committed to implementing the United States
national action plan on women, peace and security - a
plan born out of resolution 1325 (2000).

We hope that today's meeting will help push the
members of the Council to take action in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Lake Chad basin and in
other conflicts in which women and girls are at grave
risk. The Deputy Secretary-General has brought those
issues to our and the world's attention today. Our
responsibility now as members of the Security Council
is to follow up this briefing with consequences for
those who perpetrate the abuses. The United States
will continue to lead the way in pressing for this much
needed accountability.

