Mr. Roet (Israel): Allow me to begin by reading
the words of Zinab, a 31-year-old Yazidi woman:

"We were in Kocho village when they came The
girls ages 10 to 30 were taken to Mosul Iwas taken
to Tal Afar and kept in a cage I escaped but was
caught again I was kept in a house as a slave for
a month then another girl and I got out through
a small window They handed me right back to
Da'esh The man who bought me that time beat me
badly and raped me whenever he wanted. He made
me wash his clothes and clean his house [Then I
escaped again, but another] guy beat me, raped me
and kept me in a locked room Half the things that
were done to me, I cannot say out loud I didn't
think I could survive much more."

It may be hard to believe, or perhaps we would prefer
not to believe, that 45 million people find themselves
in some form of modern slavery. According to the
Walk Free Foundation Global Slavery Index, these
are 45 million people deprived of their identity, taken
away from their families, traded and transferred from
one hand to another as if they were pieces of property
instead of human beings - imagine, 45 million people
deprived of freedom. This would amount to the entire
population of Ukraine, to 70 per cent of the population
of France, 4.5 times the population of Bolivia, 5.5 times
the population of my country and more than 13 times the
population of Uruguay. It is hard to grasp this number,
let alone to comprehend the tragedy and suffering. But
it is impossible, even inhuman, to remain indifferent
while listening to the words of people like Zinab.

In recent years, human trafficking, forced labour
and slavery have become ever more dire and painful
with each passing day. For our region, the Middle East,
this debate could not be more relevant and timely.
Vulnerable refugees fleeing the horrors of war in Syria
frequently end up in another horrifying reality - that
of slavery and exploitation. Armed groups, terrorists
and powerful transnational criminal networks are
taking advantage of the helplessness of refugees,
including young children, and forcing them into labour,
crime and prostitution while falsely promising them a
better future in Europe. Terrorist groups like Da'esh
regularly coerce girls into sex slaves and force boys as
young as eight years old to carry out terrorist acts such
as suicide bombing.

For many around the world, such horrors might
sound like a distant reality. For us in Israel, we
sadly witness such atrocities in our own backyard.
Together with a surge in international terror, cases of
unimaginable forced labour, slavery and untold cruelty
are flooding the Middle East and flowing to other
regions of the world.

The signing of Palermo Protocol and the adoption of
resolution 2331 (2016) were steps in the right direction,
but signing declarations and adopting resolutions is
not enough. From our own experience, we know that
the key to saving lives lies in the protection of those
that are most vulnerable, enacting and enforcing
laws and encouraging rehabilitationln Israel in 2010,
we were finally able to put an end to the trafficking
of women for prostitution. Israel was able to achieve
this outcome by applying a system for prevention,
prosecution and rehabilitation. Israel strongly believes
that by combining these three decisive actions, we will
be able to work towards the eradication of slavery and
human trafficking.

To conclude, in less than a month Jews around the
world will sit around their Passover table and recall the
story of how the ancient Israelites escaped bondage
in ancient Egypt and achieved freedom in the land of
Israel. Freedom and the abolishment of slavery for all
humankind are indeed fundamentally enshrined in our
culture. In fact, we are commanded to retell this story
every year and to recall how we were treated when we
were slaves - and we have been doing so for thousands
of years. With the bitter memories of slavery forming
our collective memories, Israel is more committed than
ever to cooperating with the Council to fight against
terror, slavery, forced labour, sexual slavery and other
similar practices. It is high time that we all work
together to finally remove this age-old scourge from
the annals of humankind.

