Ms. Miiller (Germany): First I thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting. I would also like
in particular to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and Ms. Smythe for their excellent
contributions to today's debate.

Allow me to express Germany's full support for
the statement to be delivered later by the presidency of
the European Union.

Germany, a relatively new member of the group
of friends of resolution 1325 (2000), particularly
welcomes the opportunity to contribute some ideas
concerning the implementation of that landmark
resolution in the field of peacekeeping operations. We
recognize the great political and practical value of the
resolution as well as the Secretary-General's
recommendations in his report (S/2002/1154) of
October 2002 on women, peace and security, with
regard to its implementation.

Much has been said about the terrible toll women
have paid, and continue to pay, in conflict situations,
for which they are largely not responsible. In that
context, I would also point out the importance of
including gender-related crimes and crimes of sexual
violence in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

My Government is convinced that the full and
active participation of women in all political and
economic decision-making, including peace processes,
is a prerequisite for improving the current situation.
Women are also indispensable agents in the process of
building democratic structures and strengthening civil
society.

Much remains to be done to implement the thrust
of resolution 1325 (2000). Whether in the context of
approving peacekeeping mandates or reviewing the
impact of sanctions, gender implications must be an
integral part of the analysis and decisions of the
Council. Unfortunately, that has not always been the
case. Past Council resolutions, particularly those
concerning the Middle East region, have too seldom
included the necessary provisions. Sooner rather than
later, we should guarantee that a gender perspective is
fully integrated into resolutions and mandates.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is only credible if it is set
as a benchmark, and therefore visibly implemented by
the peacekeeping forces. For example, each female
soldier or police officer patrolling with her male
colleagues in the streets of Kabul demonstrates to the
local population the aim of resolution 1325 (2000)
better than any general informational efforts could.
Therefore, Germany attaches great importance to
adequate representation of female soldiers in the
German contingents.

Germany will be leading a Security Council
mission to Afghanistan in the coming days. We firmly
intend to take up - in close cooperation with our
Afghan partners - the gender perspective and to
encourage them to provide for stronger involvement of
women in decision-making processes, inter alia by
discussing concrete measures that should be taken in
order to improve the situation. We would like to ensure
that the final report from the mission properly reflects
this aspect.

Support for women's human rights and women's
empowerment in all spheres of life and decision-
making is an overarching objective of all German
projects in Afghanistan. Hence we take gender
mainstreaming issues into account in all our projects,
and support the equal participation of women,
particularly in the fields of human rights, constitutional
reform, training of police forces, access to the
administration and education.

We welcome the very recent nomination of the
assistant to the Senior Gender Adviser of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
and express our sincere wish that the post of Senior
Gender Adviser be filled shortly. We welcome the
encouraging developments and acknowledge the
important contribution that gender advisers can make.
We must ensure that the post of gender adviser is
tailored in a way that also attracts high-ranking United
Nations personnel.

In peace operations, special gender advisers have
been nominated as part of the human rights section. We
understand that cooperation between the gender
advisers and other human rights personnel has been
very productive. Yet we note that resolution 1325
(2000) provides for a much broader mandate, including
nation-building, security, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) and economic and
humanitarian affairs. Recent peace-building experience
has shown that national ownership of the processes
involved is critical to their success. Facilitating the
active participation of women in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict management in all
relevant forums therefore commands the additional
attention not only of all United Nations personnel, but
of the Council as well.

In closing, let me underline the important role of
non-governmental organizations regarding women's
participation and empowerment in conflict resolution,
peace and post-conflict rehabilitation processes. The
active involvement of civil society should be further
encouraged and supported.

