Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Like others who
have spoken before me, Australia remains committed
to ending the scourge of conflict-related sexual
violence. Besides the outrageous breach of women's
rights that rape and other forms of sexual Violence
entail, its impact on families and communities is
particularly devastating and has consequent long-
lasting negative effects on peace processes.

We welcome Ms. Wallstrom's appointment and
the efforts she has made since taking office to plug
some of the operational gaps in this agenda, as well as
her broader advocacy efforts.

We support the Secretary-General's impressive
recommendations on specific steps that need to be
taken to address the remaining challenges in this field.
The proposal for the United Nations system to set up a
mechanism, on which agreement has now been
achieved, to better monitor, report and analyse data on
sexual violence and to ensure that information flows
effectively to the Security Council is particularly
important. We urge the Council's sanctions committees
to give due regard to relevant information they receive
through this mechanism. We recently witnessed the
first listing of an individual by the Council's
Democratic Republic of the Congo Sanctions
Committee on children-and-armed-conflict grounds.
Similar listings of individuals on sexual-violence
grounds would be an important deterrent to others.

Of course, information flowing to the Council
should be reliable. The Council's endorsement in
October of the comprehensive set of indicators was a
significant achievement in that regard. We look
forward to the United Nations system putting those
indicators into action to collect data on sexual
violence, as well as to inform policy and programmatic
responses.

Early warning signs of conflict-related sexual
violence are often received. But as the mass rapes in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in July and
August sadly demonstrated, our coordinated and
comprehensive analysis of those signs must be
strengthened in order to improve the prospects for
preventing attacks on civilians. Sexual violence is not
unique in that regard. We encourage all relevant parts
of the United Nations system to collaborate in
identifying a comprehensive matrix of early warning
signs and recommended responses. As we know, the
Special Advisers on the prevention of genocide and on
the responsibility to protect are also undertaking
relevant and important work in this field. A coordinated
and comprehensive approach to early warning will
enhance the response capacity of peacekeepers on the
ground.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2010/604) was
particularly valuable because it identified practical,
pragmatic ways in which this issue can be tackled.
Australia is a firm supporter of tangible, practical
solutions. There remains a gap between our collective
expectations on what United Nations peacekeeping
should be able to do and the actual capacity of
peacekeepers on the ground. Operational guidance,
training and resources must be provided to mission
leadership and peacekeepers so that they are prepared
to take action in response to threats against civilians
during conflict, including sexual violence.
We were very pleased to support the joint
analytical inventory developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women under the auspices of
the inter-agency network United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. This is a key tool
for the Organization to use in improving its ability to
protect civilians from conflict-related sexual violence
as part of peacekeeping operations. We are supporting
our United Nations partners in fully operationalizing
this tool, including by incorporating it into
predeployment training for peacekeepers. That is the
scenario-based training referred to in the Secretary-
General's report.

We are also supporting the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
implementing a strategy to combat sexual violence in
communities of internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
North and South Kivu, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. UNHCR's strategy of creating a common
framework and actions for all those involved in
combating sexual violence in that country could be
applied in other situations involving IDPs.

Much more needs to be done to address this vital
issue, as we have heard this evening. We look forward
to further reporting and briefing on how the United
Nations system has gone about translating into action
the list of proposals in the Secretary-General's report.
Annual reporting is needed. Next year a report could,
for example, document action and achievements in
addressing conflict-related sexual violence, including
the development of terms of reference for the new
women's protection advisers and any actions they
undertake. Real and effective action to address sexual
violence in conflict-related situations requires ongoing
dedication to action. We look forward to the Council in
particular taking forward that action on behalf not just
of the United Nations or States Members, but the entire
international community.

