Mr. Plasai (Thailand): First of all, I wish, on behalf
of my Government, to express our deepest condolences
to the Russian Federation for the tragic assassination of
Ambassador Andrei Karlov in Ankara yesterday.

The prevalence of human trafficking in conflict
situation is of grave concern and requires collective
and comprehensive efforts and an immediate and
decisive response. We share wth previous speakers the
concern regarding the nexus between conflict-related
sexual violence and human trafficking, particularly
the cases that involve United Nations personnel and
peacekeepers. As a troop-contributing country, the
Kingdom of Thailand welcomes the efforts of the
Security Council and the United Nations system to
address and respond to reports oftrafficking in persons,
as well as sexual exploitation and abuse, in the context
of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2331 (2016). We reaffirm our commitmentto cooperating
with the international community in combatting all
forms of human trafficking, and we place that agenda
at the top of our national priorities. We are trying to
effectively address this critical issue through a five-pillar
strategy, which is very much in line with the globally
recognized strategy of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in addressing human trafficking.
The five pillars are: policy, prosecution, protection,
prevention and partnership. The implementation of the
strategy focuses on nine key areas, namely, the rule of
law, anti-complicity and anti-corruption, expediting
the administrative and judicial process against human
trafficking cases, effectiveness of frontline operations,
reduction of risk for vulnerable groups, improved
victim and witness protection, integrated efforts
against child exploitation, enhanced partnership, and
public awareness and outreach.

Concerning policy, I would like to underline that
our policy focuses on taking steps to ensure the effective
implementation of our international obligations,
particularly the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons.

The Kingdom of Thailand has made consistent
efforts to strengthen its judicial institutions and improve
its proactive law enforcement, in order to investigate
cases, rescue victims and prosecute those involved with
human trafficking syndicates in a timely and efficient
manner. We place high priority on protection of and
assistance to victims of trafficking by addressing
all aspects of their essential needs. We support the
creation of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund
for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, which provides humanitarian,
legal and financial aid to victims of human trafficking.
We therefore strongly encourage Member States
in a position to do so to contribute to the Voluntary
Trust Fund.

With regard to prevention, the most efficient
preventive measure is to tackle the root causes of
conflict, in order to reduce the risk of conflict-affected
vulnerable groups falling into the hands of human
traffickers. National and local campaigns, as well as
community-based activities, have been carried out to
raise awareness of human trafficking.

Concerning partnership, the Royal Thai Government
attaches importance to forging strategic partnerships
with the private sector, civil society, academia and
the media in the fight against human trafficking. We
are also of the view that close cooperation with key
stakeholders at all levels is crucial for achieving a
sustainable solution to the problem.

The success of our common fight against human
trafficking requires an integrated approach and well-
coordinated efforts of all concerned. The United Nations
can play a leading role in that regard. October 2017 will
be an opportune time to strengthen those efforts, as the
international community will be appraising the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons through a mandated high-level meeting of the
General Assembly. We hope that the meeting will help to
identify the challenges and gaps in the implementation
of the Plan of Action and enhance States' capacity to
put an end to this heinous crime.

