Ms. Siniora Atallah: Today, I speak in my capacity
as the General Director of the Women's Centre for
Legal Aid and Counselling. I also speak on behalf ofthe
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security. I
speak to the Security Council as a peace leader and as a
human rights defender who has witnessed, documented
and spoken out for three decades about violations in
the occupied Palestinian territory. Today, I bring to
Council members the voices of Palestinian women,
who still face violence, discrimination, deprivation
and systematic violations of their human rights on a
daily basis.

Mervat, a resident of the old city of Hebron, stepped
out of her home one day to take out the garbage, when
she was violently attacked by a group of settlers.
Neighbours who heard Mervat's screams witnessed
them beating her and raised the alarm. Mervat was four
months pregnant at the time and lost her baby as a result
of her injuries.

Last September, Sana, living in Jerusalem, awoke
to find Israeli police at her front door. A young mother
of two, she listened shocked as they informed her that
they were going to demolish her home under the pretext
that her family did not have a building permit. They
were given one week to move out.

Earlier this May, during the recent marches of
return on the eastern border of Gaza, Nisreen, a mother
of three, was shot in the chest by the Israeli military.
Nisreen had been peacefully demonstrating with a
group of women and children. Two days later, Alan was
shot in the stomach while walking with her friends to
watch folk dancers perform near the same border.

These stories illustrate what life under occupation
is like for ordinary Palestinian women and girls. They
live at risk of violent attacks while going about their
daily lives. Their homes can be snatched from them at
a moment's notice. Participation in public life is under
a shadow of fear.

TheIsraelioccupationandtheresultinghumanitarian
crisis are deeply gendered and exacerbate existing
gender inequalities. Women disproportionately endure
the violence of occupation borne by all Palestinians,
and often with gender-specific consequences.
Palestinian women face attacks, threats, intimidation,
discrimination and restrictions on their movements by
the Israeli military on a daily basis. Night raids, the
destruction of property and violence at checkpoints
are also routinely committed by the occupying forces.
Palestinian women lose their homes and cannot reunite
with their families owing to restrictions or the denial
of residency permits. They look on as their husbands
and children are detained, attacked or killed in front
of them. Women often suffer gender-specific torture in
Israeli prisons, and the discrimination experienced by
refugee women is compounded by displacement.

The occupation reinforces the patriarchal structures
of Palestinian society. Women must earn a living on top
of their responsibilities to care for the young, sick or
injured, often isolating them from their communities
and public life. In efforts to protect their families from
violence or arrest, women often become prison guards
to their own children. Political violence in the public
sphere leads to spikes in violence in the private sphere.
Domestic violence is shockingly high and femicide is
on the increase.

Not only do women suffer these abuses; they are
also starved of the resources to respond to them. The
fragile conditions created by the occupation mean that
Palestinian women lack access to justice and the means
to live. The recent funding cuts to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East have also disproportionately impacted
the lives of Palestinian women, especially in health
and education. The destruction of infrastructure has
had a devastating impact on families and the lives of
women and girls by cutting off their access to food,
water, sanitation, electricity and life-saving medical
care. As the Special Rapporteur on violence against
women noted in 2017, economic deprivation and high
levels of unemployment, compounded by the pressure
of the occupation, have also made Palestinian women
vulnerable to violence. More resources for Palestinian
women not only would make them less prone to
violence but are essential to their participation in
their communities.

For women, the fear and deprivation accompanying
occupation have meant their being unable to join public
life or defend our rights. The Israeli occupation has
shrunk the space for a free and independent civil society
by banning peaceful demonstrations and persecuting
journalists who are critical of the occupation. Women
human rights defenders are accused of incitement by
Israel. In July, thousands of Palestinian women marched
on the eastern borders of the Gaza Strip in peaceful
protest against the occupation. Israeli snipers shot at
and used tear gas against protesters, injuring thousands
and killing almost 100 civilians. In addition, civil
society volunteers - including medical workers - are
targeted by the army, despite being clearly identifiable
in uniform. Femalejournalists reporting on the conflict
are assaulted and detained. Retaliation for their work
deters them from reporting on the occupation. This
serves to further marginalize women's voices from the
public sphere.

In committing to women and peace and security,
the Security Council recognized the importance of
women's meaningful participation and that without
women, there can be no peace. The lives of Palestinian
women are evidence that these commitments have not
been met. Although women have been at the forefront of
the Palestinian liberation movement and the Palestinian
Authority worked with grass-roots women leaders to
create the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000),
few have been represented in peace talks. Women are
underrepresented, both as official negotiators and as
technical advisers, despite clear evidence that they have
often been critical in working across political divides,
building grass-roots support for peace and providing
essential expertise on human rights and issues like
health and access to resources.

Little space has been made to integrate Palestinian
women's concerns into key political processes,
including for achieving Palestinian statehood and for
national reconciliation. Representation of women in
key decision-making positions, including in Palestinian
Authority institutions, is barely 5 per cent. Only 4 out
of 30 members of the internal reconciliation team are
women. Palestinian women have not been consulted
in shaping political or humanitarian responses in our
country and our needs have therefore been overlooked.

The situation of Palestinian women today has been
further compounded by a real and serious crisis of
legitimacy and trust in the United Nations. The Security
Council was first established to maintain peace and
security, not to manage conflict. Its chronic inability to
take effective action to end the Israeli occupation, with
little hope that this will change, exemplifies that crisis.
On the contrary, Member States continue to trade arms
with and offer political support to Israel, while Israel
continues to impose policies and practices that are in
clear violation of international law.

Israel's occupation and the prevailing culture of
impunity have not only destroyed the lives of Palestinian
women and men; they have jeopardized peace and
security across the Middle East. The international
community can no longer look away from the plight
of my people, who have endured the world's longest
occupation. We call on the Security Council to address
the root causes of the conflict and support our right to
self-determination. We call for an end to the occupation
as the first step towards building peace and for women
to be at the forefront of these efforts.

Therefore, the Security Council must act to
ensure women's meaningful participation in conflict
prevention, democratic transition, reconciliation
efforts, and any humanitarian work; call on the
Palestinian Authority to implement its 1325 national
action plan by allocating sufficient funds and providing
high-level and ongoing political support for the
meaningful participation of Palestinian women in all
stages of peace processes; call upon Israel to end its
military occupation and settlement expansion, commit
to a political solution and immediately cease violations
of its commitments under international law; and call on
States to stop exporting arms to Israel, where there is a
risk that they may be used to commit serious violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law, in
line with the Arms Trade Treaty. Governments, arms
companies and arms dealers must be held accountable
for transferring arms in situations where they fuel
conflict and grave breaches of international law.

The Security Council must also act to end the
culture of impunity and ensure accountability for
abuses and violations against women and women
human rights defenders by Israeli forces or any other
actor; ensure that all humanitarian efforts are gender-
responsive; and use all tools at its disposal to ensure
women's meaningful participation and that gender
analysis is integrated into any discussions of the
situation, including by adding the occupied Palestinian
territory to the agenda of the informal expert group
on women and peace and security and inviting women
civil society representatives to brief the Council during
country-specific discussions.

Palestinian women who have grown up under the
occupation have been on the front lines defending our
lands, our homes and our families. We continue to
lead efforts to demand accountability and advocate for
equality. We therefore have not only the right, but also
the ability, the expertise and the experience to forge the
path towards sustainable, just and durable peace.

