Ms. Chana (United Republic of Tanzania): The
UnitedRepublicofTanzaniawelcomesSpain'sleadership
on the importance of the role of women in peace and
security. We also commend Spain's Security Council
presidency for its focus on the invaluable contribution
women can bring to the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, the Executive Director of UN-Women,
the President of the Executive Board of Solidarite'
feminine pour la paix et le developpement integral and
the President of the Organization of Women's Freedom
in Iraq for their briefings.

Fifteen years ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), which provided a foundation
on which the international community could establish
greater engagement by women in the area of peace
and security. Tanzania is pleased to note that progress
has been made. The establishment of a normative
framework on women and peace, the creation of
UN-Women and the establishment of the Offices of
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and for Children and
Armed Conflict are positive developments and have
truly made a difference.

Obviously, there is much to be done in enabling
the participation of women in peace processes and
post-conflict political transition and in protecting,
and countering the violation of, children. These gaps
are largely attributed to the failure to collect sufficient
resources, lagging political commitment and the
absence of a strong accountability regime.

In advancing the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), the Security Council, the United Nations
system, regional organizations, Member States and civil
society have important roles to play. In addition, various
United Nations bodies and entities should tirelessly
strive to discharge their respective mandates with a
clear division of labour and in coordination. Likewise,
Member States have the primary responsibility
for protecting women's rights. In efforts to protect
women's rights and strengthen their role in peace and
security, the ownership of national Governments must
be valued. The international community should also
provide assistance to countries in need, while focusing
on capacity-building.

Achieving women's development is the true
foundation for realizing women's empowerment.
At present, international development support and
technical assistance is inadequate to meet the needs
of women, especially in developing countries. It is
in that regard that we call upon the international
community to improve its support for issues of women
and development. Capacity-building support to the
countries concerned, as well as supporting women's
and civil society organizations that play roles in conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and national reconciliation,
is crucial.

Advancing the participation of women in peace
processes and in public life needs to be supported by
strategic partnerships with national parliamentarians
and with community and religious leaders. Such a
partnership has worked for Tanzania, and we are
committed to ensuring that women are represented
at all decision-making levels and that their rights are
protected and their security genuinely guaranteed.
We believe that where women are fully represented,
societies become more peaceful and stable. We also
believe that where gender-based violence is eliminated
and women are involved in conflict resolution, peace is
more entrenched and sustainable.

Today Tanzania reaffirms its commitment to do the
following. It will fully domesticate all women's rights
treaties. It will develop a stand-alone act on violence
against women. It will promote and support financing
for the sustainable implementation of national and local
authority plans to end violence against women and
children and ensure harmonized protection at all levels.
It will ensure that the principle of 50-50 representation
of women and men - gender equality - in all key
decision-making positions is achieved. It will continue
its dedication to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

