Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): At the outset, allow me
to express our sincere appreciation for your initiative,
Mr. President, in convening the meeting today. Our
appreciation also goes to Ms. Margot Wallstrom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Mr. Herve Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for their comprehensive presentations today.

The report of the Secretary-General on conflict-
related sexual violence (S/2012/33) that has been
introduced today by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
highlights progress achieved in monitoring, analysis
and reporting activities aimed at addressing sexual
violence against women in conflict and post-conflict
situations, including the important role of women's
protection advisers in that context, and provides
information on parties to conflict credibly suspected of
committing or being responsible for acts of sexual
violence, in relation to the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1960 (2010) on sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict.

In that regard, Egypt would like to express its
appreciation for the efforts exerted by Ms. Wallstrom
and her team in preparing the report in consultation
with concerned Member States. However, Egypt
believes that the inclusion of section IV.B, entitled
"Sexual violence in the context of elections, political
strife and civil unrest", to the report of the Secretary-
General falls far beyond the mandate of the Special
Representative to implement resolution 1960 (2010)
which, in paragraph 8,

"Requests the Secretary General to establish
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
on conflict-related sexual violence, including
rape in situations of armed conflict and
post-conflict and other situations relevant to the
implementation of resolution 1888 (2009), as
appropriate, and taking into account the
specificity of each country".
As resolution 1888 (2009) focuses mainly on
situations of particular concern with respect to sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict, the inclusion
of section IV.B in the report, in our view, constitutes an
unjustified widening of the scope of activities of the
Special Representative without a proper mandate from
the Security Council.

Despite the spirit of openness and transparency
that characterized Egyptian foreign policy after the
revolution of 25 January 2011, Egypt does not see any
reason whatsoever for its inclusion for the first time in
the new and innovative section IV.B of the report,
which mixes conflict-related with non-conflict-related
sexual violence.

Notwithstanding the extensive consultations
between my delegation and the Special Representative
on paragraphs 80 to 82 of the report, it is important to
stress once again that our engagement in those
negotiations cannot be construed as acceptance of the
addition of the new section, and to stress yet again that
the current situation in Egypt cannot in any way be
characterized as armed conflict. Thus, Egypt cannot be
dealt with on equal footing with other States mentioned
in the innovative section IV.B of the report, where a
conflict exists and widespread systematic documented
sexual violence has been committed against women.

What is more shocking is the major discrepancy
in section IV.B, comparing a peaceful revolution in
Egypt - where a single isolated incident is under
court-martial consideration - with the grave situation
in Syria, which has witnessed and is still witnessing an
armed conflict in which military forces are involved in
a conflict situation with opposition armed groups,
according to the Syrian Government itself. Nor can this
single, isolated incident in Egypt be equated with
events in other countries mentioned in the same section
of the report, such as that referred to in paragraph 84,
where "two years after the violence, not a single
perpetrator has been convicted", and another referred
to in paragraph 85, where "a total of 1,500 cases were
documented, although the exact number was estimated
to have been higher".

While reiterating our appreciation to
Ms. Wallstrom for the openness and flexibility shown
during the consultations with the mission of Egypt on
this issue, which resulted in the inclusion of some of
our views in the report - particularly those related to
the decision of the Supreme Council of Armed Forces
1243937

to tighten the penalty for crimes of sexual harassment,
abduction and rape - other Egyptian proposals have
not found their way into the report. The allegations of
virginity tests in paragraph 81 have been extensively
investigated by the Egyptian military authorities and
the suspected doctor is being tried before the supreme
military court, reflecting Egypt's strong belief in the
rule of law and zero tolerance towards any violation,
foremost among which is any sexual-related violation.
This in itself should have provided the justification for
not mentioning Egypt at all in the report, particularly
as this incident and the way it has been handled
represent no systematic practice in this regard.

Egypt is cruising on a smooth democratic
transition towards the fulfilment of the Egyptian
people's aspirations to the rule of law, justice and
human rights in a context of full accountability and
non-impunity. Moreover, most of the other incidents
cited in paragraph 81 of the report occurred during the
troubled last days of the former regime. All of them
have been investigated and the perpetrators are
currently on trial, starting with the former President
himself down to any perpetrator of any violation of the
rights of the men and women of our country. Therefore,
I assert once again that there is no ground to
substantiate the inclusion of Egypt in the current report
or in any future report of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council on this matter.

Due regard should be given to the influential role
played by Egyptian women in the 25 January
revolution, which in itself was a clear manifestation of
their active participation in the transformation process
within Egyptian society. In the same vein, Egypt
reiterates its full commitment to all international legal
instruments and protocols on the rights of women, and
to furthering Egyptian women's contribution in all
public domains and preserving the gains they have
made over decades.

I conclude by reiterating Egypt's strong
commitment to the promotion and protection of all
women's rights, and by urging all United Nations
mandate holders - in this, case the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict - to
perform their functions in strict observance of their
mandates, upholding the principles of impartiality,
objectivity and non-selectivity.

