Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
are here today to concretize the strategic lines of action
developed in resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009)
to fight conflict-related sexual violence against women
and girls. We therefore thank you, Madame, for
organizing today's open debate. We welcome the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2010/604), which provides
an excellent basis for today's discussion, and wish to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot
Wallstrom, for her excellent work. Her mandate is
important and challenging. We assure her of our full
support and encourage her to build strong synergies
with the United Nations operational system.

The Secretary-General's report explicitly states,
and we probably all agree, that this year was further
proof of our inability to prevent sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict. We need to do better in the
future. The recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General indicate the way to advance, and
we fully support them all. In particular, we should like
to highlight the following points and call on the
Security Council to take action accordingly.

First, Switzerland supports the establishment of a
monitoring, analysis and reporting mechanism, as
provided for in resolution 1960 (2010), adopted
yesterday. The mechanism will collect timely,
objective, accurate and reliable information about
conflict-related sexual violence, for example on
incidents, trends and patterns. Such information should
be provided by competent and well-coordinated
sources on the field and serve as a basis for concerted
action by the Security Council. The mechanism should
take into consideration the experience of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism on the six grave
violations against children in armed conflict identified
in resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009). With a
separate mechanism for women and girls, the Council
would assure consistency in countering the use of
10-69905
systematic sexual violence in conflict situations on its
agenda.

Secondly, it is important to increase pressure on
conflict parties and individuals to comply with
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
to enhance efforts to end impunity for conflict-related
sexual violence. To that end, the Security Council has a
range of tools including, but not limited to, the use of
the sanction system or the competence to refer matters
to the International Criminal Court. We encourage the
Security Council to make full use of the available tools
in order to give teeth to measures concerning women,
peace and security.

Thirdly, we support the idea that all parties to
conflict should prepare specific plans of action for
ending acts of sexual violence in conflict situations on
the Council's agenda. This would enable the
international community to provide specific support to
the actors concerned in fulfilling their obligations.
Further, it would contribute to a transparent and
objective follow-up by the Security Council. The
deployment of rapid response teams on the rule of law,
as provided for in resolution 1888 (2009), is an
example of such support. In this context, we would like
to mention the Justice Rapid Response initiative,
initiated by Canada and supported by my country. The
initiative provides, for example, rapidly deployable
criminal justice professionals who collect information
in cases of sexual violence in a timely fashion.

Fourthly, we encourage United Nations agencies
to continue efforts to increase the capacity of their
personnel in matters of conflict-related sexual
violence. This is particularly important with a View to
the establishment of a monitoring and reporting
arrangement. Resolution 1888 (2009) introduced the
mandate for women's protection advisors who, once
operational, will provide additional, important points
of reference for the women-protection efforts.

Finally, we invite the Council to systematically
link thematic and geographical issues. When
considering a conflict situation, it is crucial to include
a thematic perspective, because the thematic issues on
the Council's agenda are cross-cutting issues. To link
that to today's subject - as deplorable as it is, sexual
violence has become characteristic of many conflicts.
It therefore calls for a consistent approach by the
Council.
10-69905

Lastly, I should like to reiterate that we fully
associate ourselves with the statement to be delivered
later by the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of
the Human Security Network.

The issue discussed in this open debate is high
among our priorities. We remain committed to
contributing to achieving the goals of resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009).

