Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing and presiding over
today's debate. Your presence is a real show of Spain's
leadership on the issue of women's empowerment.
I thank the Secretary-General for his continuing
leadership in the area and Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
her briefing and her stewardship of UN-Women. My
deepest respect and admiration go to Ms. Lusenge,
Ms. Mohammed and Ms. Murabit for the extraordinary
work they do and for taking the time to come and
speak to us today. Their bravery in pushing women's
empowerment in their own societies leaves us in awe,
and their bluntness today in describing the dashed
hopes of many over the 15 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) should motivate us all.

Fifteen years ago, the Council adopted a resolution
recognizing that the inclusion of women's voices in
decision-making on peace and security leads to more
equitable, sustainable and resilient results. That is not a
theory; it is a fact. The global study commissioned by
the Secretary-General on the resolution's impact and the
challenges we still face offers ample evidence of that.
One qualitative study found that peace processes with
female participants demonstrated a 20 per cent increase
in the probability of an agreement lasting at least two
years. In the Security Council, we are not faithfully
advancing international peace and security if we are
not doing everything possible to ensure that women are
included and empowered in peace processes.

As others have noted today, the past 15 years have
seen some measurable progress. That is evident in the
advances of individual countries, particularly in the
area of women's participation. When resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted, women in Afghanistan could not
leave their homes unaccompanied by a man. Today,
Afghanistan has two women governors, four women
Cabinet members, 150 women in the judiciary and a
28 per cent representation of women in Parliament.
Progress is also apparent in the greater involvement
of women and greater attentiveness to gender issues in
peace processes. Over the past 15 years the percentage of
peace treaties referencing women has increased nearly
two and a half times, to 27 per cent, and, as others have
noted, during the ongoing peace talks in Colombia, a
dedicated gender subcommittee was established to
ensure that gender issues were considered and women's
rights recognized.

But the numbers and stories also reflect how far
we still have to go. The number of women members of
parliament around the world has roughly doubled over
the past two decades, but the current proportion is still
a mere 22.5 per cent. In my country it is at a record high
ofjust 19 per cent. Even in the case of the Colombian
peace negotiations, there is nothing close to gender
parity, and the increased inclusion ofwomen came after
active organizing and lobbying by female leaders. Mary
Robinson, the former President of Ireland and current
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Climate
Change, recalls a female leader in civil society once
telling her that "a typical peace process involved bad
men forgiving other bad men in fancy hotels in front
of television cameras". Not every aspect of that image
rings true today, but it is still entirely too familiar.

Moreover, women continue to be harassed,
assaulted and murdered for daring to speak up or get
involved. Last year a prominent, remarkable woman
named Salwa Bugaighis, a friend and colleague
of Ms. Murabit who had previously resigned from
Parliament in Libya to protest its lack of women, was
murdered in her home on election day. Just yesterday, an
Afghan woman named Toorpaki Ulfat, a human rights
defender and employee of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, was killed as she headed to
work in Kandahar. Around the world, too many other
women continue to be harassed or imprisoned by their
Governments for doing nothing more than speaking up
on behalf of their communities, including 18 of the 20
women profiled last month by my Government on the
occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration.

In the face of such continued challenges, there are
two areas I want to highlight today in which the Council
should play a particularly active role. The first is
peacekeeping. As the Secretary-General has reported,
the insufficient number of women peacekeepers
interferes with core mission tasks such as protection
and engagement with female members of communities.
That is why, at last month's peacekeeping summit,
President Obama called for more women leaders in
critical mission roles. It is why we will all benefit from
the fulfilment of the pledges made by several nations,
including Rwanda and India, to contribute more female
troops and police.

In addition to more women wearing blue helmets,
we must take every possible step to root out sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers, which is too
prevalent. Countries must train their peacekeepers
better in order to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse,
and must hold any soldier or staffer who commits such
crimes fully accountable. As President Obama said last
month and as the Secretary-General has made clear,
there should be zero tolerance for them. Yet too often
today their perpetrators enjoy impunity.

Secondly, the Council must ensure that women
are full participants in combating the threat of violent
extremism. That is essential not just because women
and girls are often the victims of groups such as
Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, it is because defeating those groups will
require women's leadership and active involvement
as community influencers and leaders, whether in
village councils or here in the Security Council. That
fact has been recognized by some diplomats, leaders
and States; the United Nations Special Envoy for
Syria, Staffan de Mistura, has worked actively with
civil society and women's rights organizations during
his consultations and negotiations. The Iraqi Council
of Ministers endorsed an emergency plan in May that
made reference to resolution 1325 (2000) and called for
measures to address the needs of women and girls in
conflict situations and facilitate their involvement in
post-conflict reconstruction.

Well beyond ensuring the Council's engagement
in those two core areas, there is much more that
each of us here can do. In all of our respective roles
as States Members of the United Nations, national
representatives and individual leaders, we must look
inward. Within the United Nations family we must
continue to integrate and act on the goals of resolution
1325 (2000). That includes supporting the Secretary-
General's commitment to elevating the work of senior
gender advisers and including more women in the
senior ranks of the United Nations. It means ensuring
that all United Nations agencies and bodies engaged in
peace, security and development take responsibility for
integrating women's voices into their work, and that
should be measurable.

As national representatives, we must hold our own
Governments to account. In the United States, our
Government has been moving forward with its national
action plan. The Department of Defense, to takejust one
example, has taken important steps, including through
integrating objectives relating to women and peace and
security into its policy strategy and planning. At the
State Department, 35 per cent of mission chiefs are now
women i an improvement of the 10 per cent level of
20 years ago, but still not yet half.

As part of this national action plan, we are also
assisting other nations in their own efforts, and today I
am pleased to announce new commitments to that end
totalling $31 million. To describe just a few examples
here, that includes more than $40 million for initiatives
to protect women from violence and promote their
participation in peace processes and decision-making,
as well as more than $8 million to implement United
States Secretary of State Kerry's accountability
initiative to fight impunity for sexual violence in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Liberia. Another $1 million will be
allocated to a justice initiative based in South Kivu
province in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
seeks to educate 50,000 women on their human rights
and how to use basic judicial procedures.

Finally, as individual leaders we must look inward
to see what more we can do in our own positions. For
women, and particularly for men, it is not enough to
be passively supportive of women's participation.
Whether it is pressing one's capital about progress on
one's national action plan, or pressing for women's
participation in internal decision-making processes, all
of our support must be active and vocal.

Just last week, the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded
to the four leaders of the Tunisian Dialogue Quartet.
One is a woman - Wided Bouchamaoui. She is not a
politician or a lifelong activist; she is a businesswoman
and the head of a Tunisian employers' union. Her
contributions and the accomplishments of the Quartet
are a timely reminder that even in the midst of grave
national crises, there is still reason for hope, above
all when women are able to join men at the table. As
she put it last week, "We did it together". I would only
elaborate, "We will do it together, or we will not do it
at all".

