Mr. Kickert (Austria): At the outset, let me thank
President Rajoy Brey and Spain for taking the lead in
organizing this open debate, marking 15 years since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Allow me also to
thank the Secretary-General and his dedicated staff for
their efforts in making a difference for women and girls
in conflict situations.

Austria aligns itself with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union.

In its national capacity, Austria commends the
extensive review exercises that have been carried out
in parallel, on the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), involving the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, United Nations
peace operations and the women, peace and security
agenda. We welcome the launch of the global study
that was made public earlier today and which Austria
has supported from its inception. This exercise was
not only necessary in terms of taking stock, but it also
provides us with important lessons learned.

Austria is alarmed by the current spread of brutal
and systemic violence, which is not only causing
unspeakable suffering to civilian populations, but
has also triggered the biggest wave of refugees and
displacement in recent history. We must develop
answers on how to deal with the growing spread of
violent terrorism and extremism, which are marked
by unprecedented levels of sexual violence, abuse, and
violations of women's and girls' rights. The perpetrators
must be held accountable for their acts before the
International Criminal Court. We must also empower
and support the work of women activists and women
human rights defenders. Therefore, a conference in
Austria in June 2016 will bring together local women
leaders with political representatives and discuss ways
forward in tackling sexual violence in armed conflict.

Austria believes that a dedicated body on the
Security Council and regular briefings on matters
related to resolution 1325 (2000) would increase the
Council's capacities to take timely and consistent
action. Gender expertise, at adequate levels, needs to
be included as well into all peace and security related
work of the United Nations. We also need champions
that take the lead. Austria would therefore support the
idea of reviving a women leaders network and would be
ready to work together with other interested Member
States in this endeavour.

Austria would like to use this occasion to join other
Member States in pledging support to women, peace
and security. These are the following pledges.

We are committed to completing a review of the
Austrian national action plan, originally dating from
2007, by the end of 2016 - with the broad participation
of civil society and women's organizations - which
will reflect findings of the United Nations high-
level review. Our inter-ministerial working group on
resolution 1325 (2000), which was established under
the national action plan and works with civil society
and women's organizations, will organize at least one
big public event per year.

Together with other interested Member States,
Austria will continue to work on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent relevant
resolutions in all regional organizations. In that respect,
Austria, together with Finland, Turkey and Kazakhstan,
will continue to push for the adoption of an action plan
on women and peace and security by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as
many other international organizations have done
before. We call on the Russian Federation to join in
that endeavour. It would be a timely deliverable for the
OSCE ministerial meeting in December in Belgrade.

Austria supports the work of UN-Women and will
continue, on a voluntary basis, to support its activities
in the field of women and peace and security. Austria
commits to realizing concrete results at the policy
level by earmarking at least 15 per cent of all our
peacebuilding spending by our development assistance
agency, Austrian Development Cooperation, for
programmes and projects aimed at furthering women's
empowerment and gender equality.

Civil society efforts are also a critical element
for the effective implementation of resolutions on
women and peace and security. Austria, through its
Development Cooperation, will spend more than
61 million in the next 3 years on its cooperation with
civil society activists in that field.

Austria will also follow up on the recommendations
developed at the symposium entitled "Enhancing
Women's Share in Peace and Security", held in
November 2014 in Vienna.

Austria commits to intensifying efforts to
achieve the goal of a 10 per cent proportion of female
soldiers within the Austrian Armed Forces and to
creating the organizational structures needed for the
institutionalized integration of gender mainstreaming
and women's empowerment within the Ministry of
Defence and the Austrian armed services.

Finally, Austria will continue to further strengthen
its training activities on resolution 1325 (2000), in
particular in pre-deployment training for peace and
humanitarian operations, which is now provided for
civilian and military experts from around the world in
Austria, as well as in its national training courses.

