Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic ofIran): Ithank
the German presidency of the Council for convening
this open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General
and the briefers for their valuable input.

Sexual violence in armed conflict - a method
often used as a tactic of war and terrorism - is a
brutal crime. Unfortunately, women and girls are its
main victims. The prevention of this inhumane practice
requires a collective effort. That, however, cannot be
successful without addressing its root causes, meaning
the occurrence of armed conflict itself. Accordingly, the
ultimate solution to prevent such crimes is to suppress
armed conflicts altogether. As long as terrorism, violent
extremism, foreign occupation and foreign intervention
exist, such a solution remains, regrettably, out of reach.

The current global environment is increasingly
becoming fertile ground for raising conflict over peace.
Destructive advocates of hatred, racism, discrimination

and unilateralism are uniting against the proponents of
win-win multilateral solutions. This is most certainly
not a promising development for women and girls, most
of whom may continue to find themselves, here or there,
sooner or later, in the midst of another horrific armed
conflict and inevitably face the cruel cycle of violence,
including sexual violence.

The question must be raised, then, as to who
is responsible for the current situation. Indeed, it
is the politicians who are putting their delusionary
geopolitical interests ahead of the lives of innocent
women and girls in other countries, thereby shaping the
landscape that makes this current situation possible. It is
therefore essential that these aforementioned politicians
change their disastrous foreign policy options and stop
manufacturing armed conflicts. Shedding crocodile
tears for women and children who have fallen victim to
the conflicts created by them or by their allies cannot
veil their direct responsibilities.

In our volatile region, the Middle East, for
instance, foreign occupation, foreign invasion and
terrorism - which have no respect for women's rights
and lives - are the core threat to their security. While
every effort should be made to prevent conflicts, which
are the main root cause of sexual violence in armed
conflicts, we also need to take other measures to
prevent and respond to such crimes. In this context, it
is essential that our efforts be focused on ensuring the
criminal accountability of such perpetrators. Likewise,
the access of survivors to justice must be ensured.
We should fight against impunity for conflict-related
sexual violence. In this regard, we support proposals
to exclude crimes of sexual violence from amnesty
provisions in the context of conflict resolution.

In conclusion, we underline the need to empower
women and promote their role in conflict prevention
and resolution. The realization of this noble objective
is a collective responsibility and we stand ready
to contribute to any genuine international effort to
that end.

