Mr. Guehenno: Let me first say how grateful we
are for this debate and for the support that has been
expressed by many delegations for the efforts of the
Department to mainstream gender and to strengthen the
capacity of the Department to do precisely that.

This morning the Ambassador of Canada noted
that I was discussing the five missions where we have
made, I think, significant progress, and he wanted to
know more about the other missions. I think that I have
to be very candid. If we have made such progress in
five missions, it is because indeed there we had senior
gender advisors who could take proactive action and
really move the process forward. When we do not have
such advisory - and that is the case of the 10 other
peacekeeping missions - what we can do is indeed
much more limited. This is all the more so as there is
not yet at Headquarters the senior advisor for gender
mainstreaming who could make sure that the missions
that have not had the benefit of gender advisors could
benefit from the successes in those missions that do
have them.

In those missions where we do not have such
support, what we have done is to strengthen, through
regional training, the capacity of our people to
demonstrate the right behaviour and the right
sensitivity. What we can do is to make sure that on
such issues as discipline, the standards of the United
Nations are upheld, that the code of conduct is
interpreted in the strictest possible fashion, that
disciplinary action follows when there is misconduct
and that criminal prosecution follows when there is
criminal conduct. All that needs to be done.

But all that, I would say, addresses just one side
of the issue. I think it was the Ambassador of
Colombia, this morning, who was noting that women
and girls in conflict are not just victims. They can also
be actors. Strengthening discipline and having a good
code of conduct addresses only the Victim side of the
issue. It does not address the positive side of really
empowering women so that we have greater success in
our peace processes.

To achieve that, you need to think through, in
each specific peace operation, how you are going to
integrate the gender dimension. That does not come
automatically, as we have heard from many speakers
throughout the day. That is why it is so important not
just to have the right discipline, the right code of
conduct, the right gender training, but to also have in
the mission, as I was saying this morning, someone at
the senior level who can think through all the
implications of taking into consideration the gender
dimensions, so that we can be more successful.

