Ms. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): We wish
to join other delegations in commending the delegation
of Viet Nam, led by the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, for organizing this
important debate. Today's debate further attests to the
need for the Security Council to continue to be seized
of the challenges of protecting women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict situations. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/465). We
welcome the recommendations contained therein and
call for their implementation. We also support his
recommendation for a high-level ministerial event to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), although we would have preferred the event to
be held at a higher level. Let me also at this juncture
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Asha Rose
Migiro, for her commitment to advancing women's
rights, which was affirmed in her statement this
morning.

We also appreciate the contributions made by Ms.
Mayanja, Ms. Alberdi and Ms. Amin, as well as various
other actors, in particular the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
United Nations Population Fund, the World Food
Programme, the World Health Organization and
various non-governmental organizations for their
efforts in implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

We are concerned that despite several measures
being undertaken in response to resolution 1325
(2000), progress in implementing it is still limited, and
women and girls continue to suffer the brunt of war,
particularly the devastating effects of sexual and
gender-based violence. It is our expectation that the
appointment of a special representative of the
Secretary-General, as provided for in Security Council
resolution 1888 (2009), will add impetus to the United
Nations work in fighting the horrendous acts of
violence committed against women and girls, as well
as boys. We also expect that the appointment of the
special representative will not shift resources from a
holistic approach to the issue of women and peace and
security, one of participation, protection and
prevention. We deeply deplore the use of sex as a
weapon of war and call for concerted efforts to end
impunity.

We need to ensure the promotion and enjoyment
of human rights for all people, and in particular women
and girls living in situations of conflict. Access to
education, health and other humanitarian assistance is a
basic human right; we thus strongly condemn those
parties to conflict who destroy schools, health facilities
and humanitarian supplies, and those who prevent
girls' and women's access to education. The Security
Council must consider taking actions against such
parties, including targeted sanctions, and must insist on
people's unhindered access to humanitarian personnel
and humanitarian assistance.

Furthermore, as part of the conflict-resolution
and peacebuilding process, the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission must ensure that
resources are provided to restore the rule of law and
strengthen the judicial and law-enforcement systems.
Mechanisms also have to be in place to take to task all
those who have been involved in violations of human
rights.
Women's involvement is necessary to ensure the
legitimacy of the decision-making process, to
encourage a broad base of participation, to make
sustainable peace and development possible and to
protect women and girls. The implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as of subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security, is a
necessary tool for promoting the involvement of
women. We also wish to underscore that we can
produce a positive impact on the lives of women and
children by implementing these resolutions in tandem
with the Beijing Platform for Action and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women.

The United Nations must set an example in its
advocacy of women's participation by the appointment
of more women to senior leadership positions in the
Organization, including in areas dealing with conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. At the grass-roots level,
we need to address the causes of the lack of women's
participation in peace processes, and to empower
women's groups socially, politically and economically.
We further recommend that Security Council members
meet with local women's groups during all missions
that the Council undertakes.

Let me conclude by reiterating the commitment
of the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
to addressing the challenges faced by women and
children in conflict situations and promoting and
protecting their human rights. We also wish to express
our support for resolution 1889 (2009), which the
Council adopted today.

