Mr. Guehenno: I am pleased to be able to take
this opportunity to share our thoughts on the progress
that has been achieved, as well as the challenges that
remain, in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security, adopted five
years ago.

To start with, I would like to share five concrete
examples of how progress is being achieved by
peacekeeping missions on the ground. First, we
successfully integrated a gender perspective in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
in Liberia, which ensured that the eligibility criteria
were revised to include women who played support
roles to the combatants as cooks, porters, sex slaves or
spies, and who oftentimes served as part-time
combatants. Over 21,000 women were demobilized as
a result, and many of those women contributed
important information on where arms caches were
hidden. In Burundi, 231 of the 485 disarmed female
ex-combatants have been recruited into the newly
restructured police force as part of their reintegration.

Secondly, in the policing sector, gender advisors
provide training to police personnel in restructured
police forces to ensure that victims of rape and other
forms of gender-based violence have access to
confidential and gender-sensitive case reporting. The
first specialist police unit to deal with gender-based
violence crimes in peacekeeping missions was
established in Timor-Leste, and similar units have
since been established in other missions.

Thirdly, much work has been done to promote
women's participation in transitional Government
institutions. In the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
gender unit helped introduce a minimum 33 per cent
quota for women into the UNMIK Regulation on
Elections for the Parliamentary Assembly of Kosovo,
which led to 28 per cent of seats being filled by women
in 2001. More recently, the support of gender units in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi has been instrumental in ensuring that
newly-adopted constitutions provide guarantees for
women's rights. This year, for the first time in its
history, Burundi elected over 30 per cent women to the
National Parliament and, as members just saw in the
short film that was presented, to the positions of Vice-
President and Speaker of the National Assembly. Many
women in Burundi have also attested to the importance
of having a female Special Representative of the
Secretary-General as a role model to spur their political
aspirations.

Fourthly, gender units are supporting the capacity
development of national counterparts in the
governmental and non-governmental sectors in all
mission areas. In Afghanistan, that includes capacity
development of women's affairs departments in 29
provinces across the country. In Cote d'Ivoire, the
gender unit is supporting mobilization of women's
groups representing political parties, trade unions and
non-governmental organizations to create a common
platform to promote women's participation in decision-
making.

Fifthly, gender units are supporting the
integration of gender perspectives into the judicial and
legal sector through the implementation of training
activities for judges, lawyers and prosecutors in a
number of missions, including Kosovo and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Furthermore, in
Liberia, the gender unit is supporting national partners
in their efforts to adopt a new rape law and, in Timor-
Leste, similar support is ongoing for the adoption of a
bill on domestic violence.

One must also recall, in addition to those
concrete examples, some of the very significant
developments of increased political participation of
women in post-Taliban Afghanistan and in newly
independent Timor-Leste. The new Afghan
Constitution guaranteed Afghan women a minimum of
25 per cent of the seats in the Lower House of
Parliament and approximately 17 per cent in the Upper
House. In the lead-up to the presidential elections in
2004, an interagency Elections Task Force chaired by
the Gender Advisor was established to monitor,
amongst other things, the level of voter registration of
women. Out of 10.5 million Afghans who registered to
vote in those elections, 40 per cent were women. The
number of female registered voters increased to
44 per cent during the parliamentary elections in
September 2005.

The Constituent Assembly which wrote the
Timorese Constitution became the country's first
Parliament and women accounted for 27 per cent of
those elected to the Constituent Assembly, an
achievement which surpassed the representation of
women in many parliaments around the world. As the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General at the
time, the late Sergio Vieria de Mello, admitted
subsequently, he had himself initially been against the
creation of a gender affairs unit in the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, as he had
not realized what an important impact the work of such
a unit would have in helping to rebuild Timorese
institutions from scratch and ensuring that the
guarantee of women's equal rights was imbedded in all
the new institutions of Government.

Those developments should not, however, make
us complacent, as the road ahead is a long and arduous
one. Our most severe setback in recent years has been
the damning and shameful revelation that some of our
peacekeepers have been engaged in the sexual
exploitation of women and girls who rely on them to
promote a safe environment. Beyond pointing to a
series of systemic weaknesses that account for such
gross misconduct, that problem should be a wake-up
call for all of us to attach even more importance to
incorporating a gender perspective into our work.
Ultimately, we will not be able to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping contexts
without empowering women and girls. We must also
remember that gender mainstreaming is much more
than the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse.

I should not have to clarify that, but it must be
noted that a significant proportion of peacekeeping
personnel still do not have a conceptual understanding
of what gender mainstreaming entails, nor have they
grasped that it is about more than just hiring more
women. That may explain in part why we have yet to
institutionalize many of our gender mainstreaming
strategies. Too often, it is individual commitment,
rather than institutionalized mechanisms, that drives
our work. We have also made limited progress in
increasing the number of female personnel in
peacekeeping, particularly in uniformed functions and
in senior leadership positions. The perspectives of
women are still not adequately harnessed to inform our
planning and operational activities. Thus, whilst gender
advisors hold regular consultations with women leaders
and civil society organizations in peacekeeping
missions, such consultations are not established
practice for all mission components.

In recognition of those shortcomings, in March of
this year I issued a policy statement on gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping that provides an
operational framework at the field and Headquarters
levels to implement resolution 1325 (2000). As part of
that policy, and in line with the recommendation of the
Council last year, my Department is currently
finalizing a comprehensive action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) that builds
on the system-wide action plan that is before the
Council today.

In renewing my Department's commitment to the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), I intend to vigorously address these challenges
in the coming years. Our work will be focused on five
main areas.

First, I will emphasize, more than I have done in
the past, that the responsibility for implementing the
resolution does not fall on the shoulders of our gender
advisers alone, or solely on our female staff. All men
and women, particularly at senior levels, at
Headquarters and in the field, have responsibilities to
implement the resolution.

Secondly, I will ensure that all existing and future
policies and guidance of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) incorporate the
relevant provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).

Thirdly, I will emphasize a commitment to gender
mainstreaming within all reporting and accountability
mechanisms at our disposal.

Fourthly, I will work to ensure that we make
marked progress towards increasing the numbers of
women in peacekeeping.

Fifthly, I will review and refine the partnership
frameworks that guide our collaboration with United
Nations agencies and with Member States in the
implementation of the resolution.

Those strategic objectives have emerged from the
ongoing process to design a DPKO action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Thus far,
individual DPKO offices have outlined strategic
objectives and actions, which will be consolidated into
one Department-wide plan in the coming weeks. As a
first step in ensuring senior management accountability
and ownership of this process, I will soon meet with
the senior management of DPKO to review the action
plan and to outline concrete steps to facilitate its full
implementation.
My managers and I will do what we can to
continue to implement the resolution. However, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is only one
part of the equation. We will rely on many others as
well to make a difference, starting, of course, with the
parties to the conflicts themselves as well as with the
States Members of the Organization. There are many
concrete things that States Members of this body, and
those contributing personnel, could do to further the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I
respectfully suggest five in particular.

First, it is necessary that Security Council
members and troop-contributing countries alike engage
with the issue of women and peace and security on an
ongoing basis, beyond just a gathering of this nature
once a year.

Secondly, the agenda of Security Council visits to
peacekeeping missions should always provide for
meaningful discussions with women leaders and with
representatives of women's organizations. That should
translate into subsequent actions to strengthen the role
of women in peace processes.

Thirdly, the Security Council itself could consider
designing an action plan to guide its role in monitoring
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Fourthly, while recognizing that Member States
have generally limited numbers of women serving in
their national military and police forces, much more
can be done to deploy women from countries that have
the capacity to do so.

Fifthly, it is vital that meaningful pre-deployment
gender training be provided to uniformed peacekeeping
personnel - women and men alike - to ensure that
they understand how critical their contribution is to the
implementation of the resolution.

In short, all Member States must take ownership
for this work, just as we are trying to do in DPKO.
Without that collective effort, we fail the women of the
countries in which we are working and weaken the
foundations for sustainable peace.

