Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate of the Security Council to
deliberate on the issue of women and peace and
security - an issue that occupies an important place on
the international agenda.

I should like to welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, back from his trip, and to thank him
for his statement as well as for the report that is before
us, which we consider to be outstanding.

The convening of this Security Council meeting
on the second anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security is proof
of the increasing concern of the Security Council about
this very important issue, that is, the role of women in
peace and security, including in post-conflict periods.

In this regard, I should like to express our
gratitude to the delegation of Singapore for having
convened an Arria-formula meeting - the kind of
meeting referred to by the Secretary-General earlier -
several days ago to consider the issue of women and
peace and security.

Men, women and children suffer greatly and
catastrophically during armed conflict. However the
effect of such conflict is surely worse on women and
children because they are the most vulnerable members
of society. During periods of conflict, women shoulder
the burden of many responsibilities, including caring
for and defending their families in dire circumstances
and for obvious reasons.

The fact that women are affected by conflict and
have a direct role in mitigating its consequences surely
underlines how valuable and essential they can be in
helping to resolve conflict by participating in
negotiations leading to agreements. Women are in
touch with the masses and are fully cognizant of the
needs and demands of various sectors of society.

Enhancing the role of women in peacekeeping
and peace-building missions is essential and important,
as affirmed in Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
We have noted the importance attached to these key
areas in the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document S/2002/ll54 and in the statement he has
just made.

My delegation has read the report of the
Secretary-General, which contains a comprehensive
analysis of the impact of armed conflict on women and
the role of women in peace-building. We believe that
some of the Secretary-General's recommendations
provide an excellent basis to build upon to reinforce
the positive steps taken so far and to address any
shortcomings that may now exist. Furthermore, the
Secretary-General's observations reflect the facts on
the ground. We therefore believe that a greater effort
should be made to address them. In that regard, I
should like to recall the outcomes of various United
Nations conferences on women, the latest of which was
the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly, on "Women 2000: Gender Equality,
Development and Peace for the Twenty-First Century",
because we believe that those outcomes are important
milestones on the road to promoting the status of
women in national societies and in the international
community, as well as their role in all aspects of life,
including the subject under discussion today.
Resolution 1325 (2000) correctly expressed
concern that women and children account for the vast
majority of those adversely affected by armed conflict
because they are easily targeted. In that regard, I
cannot fail to mention the Arab women and children in
the occupied Arab territories, who are, indeed, easy
targets for the Israeli occupying forces. It would not be
an exaggeration to say that at least half, if not more, of
the victims of the Israeli military machine are women
and children. In times of conflict and occupation,
women are deprived of their right to participate in
political decision-making on issues of peace and
security, particularly if they cannot even leave their
homes or shelters. In that regard, we stress the need for
the Israeli occupying authorities to respect
international humanitarian law and the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to civilians, particularly
women and children and to put an end to the practices
that they carry out daily, violating the rights of Arab
civilians, in particular Arab women, in the occupied
Arab territories.

In the Syrian Arab Republic women are given
great importance. That is clearly shown in the
achievements made in improving the status of women
in all political, economic and social fields, based on the
equality of men and women in their rights and
obligations under the Constitution.

