Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Germany and in
particular you, Mr. President, as its Foreign Minister,
for your commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda and to eliminating sexual violence
in times of conflict. I thank you for this initiative,
Mr. President, and for being with us in the Chamber
today. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Antenio Guterres and his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for
their valuable briefings, and to reiterate our full support
for them in their and their teams' daily struggle. On
behalf of France, I want to express special thanks to
Ms. Murad and Dr. Mukwege, whose commitment,
courage and vision command our admiration. It is an
honour for the Security Council to hear them today
and see them side by side before us. They know that
they can count on France to support them in the fight
against sexual violence, as we have done for many
years. Finally, I would like to warmly thank Ms. Amal
Clooney and Ms. Inas Miloud for their unwavering
commitment to this fight and for their powerful and
informative briefings.

At the outset, I want to make a short but worrying
comment before returning to possible courses of
action that we can take in our work. We must be
uncompromising, given that in 2019 we are still facing
an intolerable situation. As various of our speakers
have eloquently stated, it is our shared responsibility
to condemn as firmly as possible the use of sexual
violence as a tactic or weapon of war, often on a large
scale and sometimes systematically. In 2018, this type
of violence once again threatened first and foremost
the most vulnerable, the women and girls who continue
to be the primary victims of discrimination. It has
forcibly displaced them, as happened in South Sudan
and Burma. It has been used to repress, terrorize and
control populations, as in Syria. Terrorist groups such
as Boko Haram have made sexual violence a strategy
of action in its own right, understood as such and
methodically executed. Migrant women and girls are
also particularly vulnerable, as we have seen in Libya
and elsewhere.

There are still 47 parties remaining on the Secretary-
General's blacklist. While some progress has certainly
been made, such as the revised legislation enacted in
Afghanistan and the signing of a joint communique in
Mali, so much remains to be done, including putting
a definitive end to issues such as forced marriage,
the practice of bacha bazi in Afghanistan and the
association of rape with adultery. We must seize every
political opportunity to make progress in the fight
against sexual violence, as in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo today, for example.

Combating impunity is an indispensable weapon for
deterrence as well as justice in this fight. International
tribunals, including the International Criminal Court,
to which France affirms its full support, and national,
regional and mixed courts must be able to prosecute the
perpetrators of these crimes. It is unacceptable, if not
inconceivable, that not a single individual associated
with Da'esh or Boko Haram who has used sexual
violence as a weapon of war on a large scale has ever
been convicted. To take just two more examples, full
light must be shed on the sexual violence committed in
Rakhine, Kachin and Shan states, and those responsible
must be prosecuted, as the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/280) recommends. Investigative mechanisms
should also be able to begin collecting the necessary
information immediately so that justice can eventually
be done, as in Syria.

As we mark the tenth anniversary of the mandate
on sexual violence in conflict situations, we have a
priority both to consolidate that mandate, of course, but
also and above all to strengthen its implementation. I
would like to briefly touch on four areas of action in
that regard.

First of all, the Security Council has a decisive role
to play in fighting sexual violence, which implies that
it must be mobilized and united. That is why France
supports draft resolution S/2019/328, proposed by
Germany. This important draft resolution should make
it possible to make major progress on expanding on the
declaration adopted by the Group of Seven in Dinard
on 5 March, particularly with regard to recognizing
a victim-centred approach, emphasizing the fight
against impunity and including gender-related crimes,
for example, among the most serious types. The draft
resolution also requests the Secretary-General to
produce a report by 2021 on children born of rape,
which is a top priority for France.

In spite of the threats that some have made, I
nevertheless want to emphasize how essential it is for
France, and for the victims, to ensure that they have
access to sexual and reproductive health. That is crucial.
The Council should also continue working to impose
sanctions on those who are responsible for this type of
violence. In that regard, we welcome the explicit criteria
added to the mandates of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic, the Committee pursuant
to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya. We also think that the Council
should invite Ms. Patten to briefus more regularly on her
remarkable efforts to intervene in specific situations.
We met with her twice in March and we invite other
Council members to do the same.

The second line ofaction that I would like to highlight
is the United Nations itself, which must continue to
play a major role in monitoring and implementing
this agenda. We want to once again express our full
support for Ms. Patten, especially in the often difficult
dialogue she has with parties to conflicts. The results
she has achieved, for example in Mali and South Sudan,
in convincing Riek Machar to give orders to prevent
and punish this type of violence, are all illustrations
of the effectiveness of her commitment, even if we
know that the war is never won and must continue to
be waged on a daily basis. We also support the team of
experts working under Ms. Patten's auspices, including
by funding its staff as they work to strengthen States'
judicial capacities. That is a key element. While
much remains to be done, we must strengthen and
improve mechanisms such as the mixed unit for rapid
intervention and suppression of sexual violence against
women and children in the Central African Republic,
which should result in trials. Peacekeeping operations
must also have the necessary means to protect women
in armed conflict, including the deployment of women's
protection and gender advisers.

Thirdly, the elimination of sexual violence in
conflict can be achieved only with strong support for
the members of civil society who work and resist so
bravely on the ground. Needless to say I am thinking
here of Ms. Murad and Dr. Mukwege, both of whom
are a source of inspiration and admiration for the entire
international community and with whom we continue
to work closely. France is proud to have been the first
country to pledge funding for the establishment of a
fund for survivors of sexual violence, announced by
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, our Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs, and Ms. Marlene Schiappa, Secretary
of State to the Prime Minister for Equality between
Women and Men. France will continue its commitment
to providing appropriate assistance to victims of sexual
violence as part of its presidency of the Group of Seven
(G-7). Ms. Murad and Dr. Mukwege can count on
France's support. Our presidency of the G-7 is also a
framework for strengthening the monitoring of sexual
violence. In the past few years we have cooperated
on projects with civil society in Yemen, Nigeria, the
Central African Republic, Cameroon, Lebanon and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo designed to provide
holistic care for victims of sexual violence.

Lastly, and we have hammered away at this point in
every Security Council debate, only a holistic approach
can ensure that the women and peace and security
agenda is effectively implemented. Women, who are
the primary victims of sexual violence, will be better
protected if they can be significant participants in
political processes and if they have the same economic
and social rights and opportunities as men. It is
therefore crucial that we work relentlessly in our fight
against sexual violence to address gender inequalities
and stereotypes, its underlying causes. Support for
stakeholders on the ground is also essential in that
regard, which is why President Macron has announced
the establishment of a fund of €120 million to support
women's movements in countries of the South. That is
also why France, in partnership with Mexico, will host
a forum commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Beijing Declaration, which will bring together
States, regional organizations and civil-society actors.

Combating sexual violence is a crucial fight. It is
also a fight that should unite us over the long term. On
behalf of France, I once again call for unity among all
the members of the Council.

