Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of August
and to thank you for convening the debate on this
crucial topic. I would also like to welcome the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/362) on sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict, which reflects
both the appalling scope and the devastating effects of
this issue.

Afghanistan remains fully dedicated to the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) on the rights of women in conflict situations. It
has become clear that the lack of a stable, secure State
often leads to persistent violations of human rights,
particularly women's rights. Insecurity allows
extremism to flourish and makes it extremely difficult
for Governments and international organizations to
provide even basic services to their citizens. The lack
of resources and capacity limits the ability of
Governments to effectively enforce protective
legislative and judicial mechanisms. Without the equal
involvement of half of our populations in our civil
societies, economies and political systems, our nations
are deeply incapacitated and our children, economies
and even the stability of our countries suffer.

Only eight years ago, under the brutal Taliban
regime, Afghanistan had no provisions for the
protection of women and human rights, but, despite
ongoing difficulties, we have made significant
progress, particularly in education and health care.
Women's issues are taken into account at each stage of

the national stabilization process and in national
strategies, such as the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy. Afghanistan has the legal and
judicial mechanisms in place to achieve success. We
are also party to the relevant international mechanisms,
including the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women. However, the
ongoing support of the international community for
Afghan efforts is absolutely necessary, both to
encourage our citizens' bottom-up efforts towards
success and to sustain the Government's top-down
labours. We have emerged from the darkness of a long
national nightmare, but we still have more work to do.

Over the past 30 years, Afghans have experienced
violence on an almost unprecedented scale. Persistent
poverty and other symptoms of conflict have
disproportionately affected women, and for the first
time in the 1990s, during a bloody internecine war,
physical and psychological violence was accompanied
by horrendous acts of sexual abuse.

The scars of those abuses continue to be seen and
felt today. Women in Afghanistan still face not just
sexual violence, but sexual discrimination and
oppression, caused and exacerbated by enduring
insecurity and the terrorist activities of the Taliban and
Al-Qaida. In some particularly unstable parts of the
country where the Taliban is still active or where the
rule of a law is not yet strong, women attempting to
work or hold office face abuse, threats and physical
attacks. Other women have their rights curtailed and
are forced into marriage and other exploitative
situations. Even in areas free of the Taliban threat, a
creeping Talibanization promotes an un-Islamic,
un-Afghan culture that denies women's basic rights.

Afghanistan supports the Secretary-General's
analysis that a central step towards preventing violence
against women is to combat gender discrimination and
to give women a larger role in political and decision-
making processes. Afghanistan's experience shows that
there are no better advocates for women's rights than
women themselves, and so we must do everything we
can to help them be heard.

In the upcoming presidential and provincial
elections, the participation of women will be crucial to
success in Afghanistan. We have had some
praiseworthy victories. Millions of women have
registered to vote, and educational programmes run by
the Government, the United Nations Population Fund
and the United Nations Mission of Assistance in
Afghanistan educate women about the voting process
and their rights and opportunities as citizens. Our
Constitution guarantees women at least 25 per cent of
the seats in provincial councils and 27 per cent of the
seats in Parliament, and women have served as
governors and in the Cabinet. A growing number of
women have registered as candidates; a record-
breaking 328 women are running for provincial
councils and two women are among the presidential
candidates.

Nonetheless, even if governmental mechanisms
are in place to ensure equality, women are silenced
within a culture of shame and, worse still, do not
demand their rights owing to a lack of awareness or
support. My Government will continue to enlist
cultural, political and religious leaders in encouraging
a proper understanding of women's Islamic and
political rights, and to explicitly and publicly condemn
all violence against women and girls. Impunity only
reinforces patterns of violence.

Afghan women need the support and protection
of the United Nations, the international community and
the Government of Afghanistan as they work to
transform society. The role of the United Nations and
the international community in that struggle should be
to support the Government of Afghanistan with
resources, knowledge and capacity-building. Led by
this Council, we should also encourage a moral and
legal awareness of women's rights, both locally and in
multilateral forums, and keep the issue of violence
against women at the top of the international agenda.
With that support, we can work to strengthen judicial
mechanisms and decrease reliance on local, ad hoc
justice systems that frequently disadvantage women.
We can increase the number of women in the Afghan
National Police and have more units dedicated to
domestic violence. We can also do more to combat
extremism and educate the public about the rights of
women by publicizing and enforcing international and
Islamic human rights norms.

The women of Afghanistan continue to suffer
from violence. However, social transformation, like
political stabilization and economic development, is a
gradual process that requires security and continuity.
We have learned that the surest way to improve the
situation of women is to provide them with education,
protection and support and to give them a platform
from which to speak for themselves. My Government
remains fully committed to that cause.

