Ms. Marinaki: First and foremost, we would like
to extend our special thanks to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General on women and peace and security (S/2016/822)
and for her excellent leadership in promoting the
agenda of UN-Women and also to Ms. Rita Lopidia for
her moving testimony. It is an honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. I would like to express our appreciation
to the Russian Federation, as the President of the
Security Council, for organizing this open debate.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

The full and effective implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda remains a priority for the
European Union. The global strategy on the European
Union's foreign and security policy sets a clear direction
that women and peace and security will continue to be
mainstreamed into all our external action. We firmly
stand by our commitments set out one year ago and we
promote as a priority the women and peace and security
agenda. We have actively followed up on our pledges
based on four main priorities.

First, we have promoted women's participation
and leadership and we remain committed to leading
by example, such as in the case of the conclusion of
Iranian nuclear issue agreement in 2015, where High
Representative and Vice-President of the European
Commission, Ms. Federica Mogherini, as well as
Secretary-General of the European External Action
Service, Ms. Helga Schmid, were leading the European
Union's negotiating team and now they are leading
and providing proper guidance to the important next
implementation phase. Out of our 10 civilian crisis
management missions, five are now led by women.
From Syria to Kosovo to South Sudan, we have been
using our influence externally to support women's
participation in peace and security processes and in
humanitarian work.

Secondly, we have taken action against sexual
and gender-based violence in conflict with a strong
focus on the humanitarian dimension. We have funded
transitional justice processes in Kosovo, Colombia and
the Philippines to help address past abuses. We are
supporting projects in Ukraine and Burundi to tackle
the use of violence against women. Our humanitarian
projects that address sexual and gender-based violence
have reached almost 3.5 million direct beneficiaries
and we continue to support the excellent work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura.

Thirdly, we have further integrated gender into
countering emerging threats, including terrorism and
violent extremism, and in engaging women directly
in tackling the root causes of violence and extremism.
We have financed diverse community-based projects
across the Horn of Africa, in Pakistan and in the whole
of the Middle East and North Africa region.

Fourthly, we have strengthened our cooperative
frameworks, both within the European Union and with
our external partners. In June we also reconfirmed
our strategic partnership with UN-Women, and we are
finalizing the European gender focal points network
and the women, peace and security national focal
points network to connect all European stakeholders
through the agenda on gender and women and peace
and security. We have made progress in meeting the
substantial financial commitment we pledged a year
ago, and we will shortly publish new project proposals
to contribute to gender equality and women's and girls'
empowerment in partner countries.

Let me conclude by reaffirming our commitment
as expressed during last year's debate (see S/PV.7533).
The United Nations can continue to rely fully on the
European Union's support, including in better, more
broadly, faster and more effectively promoting the
women and peace and security agenda worldwide.

