Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to commend Chile for conducting the presidency of the
Security Council in the month of January in such an
outstanding way, which has been confirmed again today
by its convening this timely and important debate.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

This week, we commemorated 70 years since the
liberation of the Auschwitz death camp - indeed a very
special day in the history of humankind. In the past
seven decades, we had said "never again" many times,
yet we allowed genocide in Rwanda and then again in
Srebrenica to ensue. We keep saying "never again", but
unfortunately, it continues to occur, and we are have
been witnessing horrible crimes committed against
civilians in conflicts throughout the world. It is still
happening in Syria. Under-Secretary-General Amos, in
her briefing to the Council in December, said that in
Syria, "The parties to the conflict continue to ignore
the most basic principles of humanity" (S/PV7342, p. 2). She continued, "We have run out of words to fully
explain the brutality, violence and callous disregard
for human life which is a hallmark of this crisis"
(S/PV. 7342, p. 2).

It is still happening in northern Nigeria, where
Boko Haram continues its campaign of terror. It is
still happening in Iraq, with atrocities, brutality and
barbaric acts perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. The list of conflicts and abuses goes on
and on. Many lessons from the past have been learned,
and the international community does have a much
deeper understanding of the impact of war on civilians.
The United Nations has become increasingly concerned
about the protection of civilians, the testimony to
which is today's debate. Nevertheless, we are still far
from succeeding in our efforts. Civilians continue to
account for the vast majority of casualties in current
conflicts; they are regularly targeted and subjected to
indiscriminate attacks and other violations by parties
to conflict.

The focus of today's debate is on the impact of
armed conflict on women and girls. We fully support
that approach, since it is a well-documented fact that
women and girls suffer greatly from the direct and
indirect effects of fighting and violence. Croatia is
deeply concerned and troubled by numerous reports of
violence against women and girls, especially rape and
other forms of sexual violence. For us in Croatia, every
story of every girl or woman who is a victim of sexual
violence and rape, whether in Syria or the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or Darfur or any other conflict
zone, is a poignant reminder of the horrors that many
women in Croatia went through during the Homeland
War in the 1990s.

As a result of that war, many women in Croatia
were victims of maltreatment, torture, humiliation and
degrading treatment and rape, which was used as a
method of intimidation and terror. Two decades after
those war atrocities were committed, these women,
their families and their communities are still coping
with devastating and lasting consequences. Sexual
violence is not only one of the most heinous crimes
committed against women in conflict, but at the same
time, it is one that is often the least visible. Therefore,
Croatia believes that time and again we have to raise our
voices against sexual violence and that the international
community can and must do more to prevent and respond
to sexual violence in conflict. For us, it is also of the
utmost importance that rape and other forms of sexual
violence in conflict be recognized as war crimes and
crimes against humanity, for which the International
Criminal Court is also competent.

Protection challenges and needs faced by women
and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict settings
are numerous, including pregnancy as a result of rape.
It is therefore vitally important to ensure full access on
the ground to comprehensive health care for the victims
of sexual violence and to meet their needs, whatever
they may be. It is our obligation and responsibility to
stand by the victims, to find better ways to prevent all
forms of violence against women in conflict and to
assist the survivors.

The United Nations protection-of-civilians
infrastructure should not only keep women and girls
issues in focus, but also provide women with more
prominent roles in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations. Stronger women's participation should
be a part of every enhanced response, including
humanitarian work on the ground.

Finally, I want to emphasize the importance of the
International Criminal Court and its crucial role in the
context of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The perpetrators of such heinous atrocities must know
that they will not escape justice. They must be aware
that they will be held accountable and pay for their
crimes. That is why it is important to strengthen the
relationship between the International Criminal Court
and the Security Council.

Let me conclude with the words of Ms. Eve Ensler,
the American playwright and activist who raises
awareness on sexual violence against women. In April
2012, Ms. Ensler participated in a round table in the
Croatian town of Vukovar, on the plight of women
victims of rape and sexual violence. On that occasion
she said,

"I have sat here today and listened to the words of
women who have been victims of rape, and I was
simply overcome by fury. The life of one woman is
the life of all of us. If someone inflicts pain on one
woman, he has inflicted pain on us all."

I am sure that we as the international community
hear those cries of pain. We cannot afford not to.
