Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this open
debate on an issue of the utmost importance and to
express our deep appreciation for your valuable efforts
in this field.

Further, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive and pertinent report (S/2011/598*).
We welcome the concept note on women's
participation and role in conflict prevention and

mediation (S/2011/654). Let me also state that we
welcome with satisfaction the progress that
UN-Women has achieved under Ms. Bachelet's
visionary leadership.

Since the adoption of landmark resolution 1325
(2000), progress has been achieved across a broad
range of issues aimed at enhancing the protection and
promotion of the rights of women and girls in conflict-
affected situations. A stronger gender perspective in
post-conflict processes, as well as in United Nations
programming and reporting, has been steadily built.
The issues of gender equality and the empowerment of
women have become critical components of political
deliberations and actions. All in all, a better
understanding is taking hold. We heartily welcome and
commend the United Nations entities, non-
governmental organizations and women's organizations
that are working selflessly in this area.

Yet as today's debate and the Secretary-General's
report have shown us, there remain formidable
challenges before us. Many structural and institutional
impediments persist. Women continue to be largely
marginalized in the national and international decision-
making spheres because of persistent challenges, such
as discriminatory laws, cultural stereotypes, lack of
education, inability to access basic services, and sparse
economic opportunities, to name a few. We firmly
believe that the participation of women and the
incorporation of gender perspectives in all contexts are
vitally important.

We must expand the role of women everywhere.
We need women to play a greater role in preventive
diplomacy, mediation and peacekeeping. We need
women to play a greater role in post-conflict
reconstruction and institution-building, and we need a
greater role for women in sustainable development and
as agents for social transformation.

The integral link between peace, security, gender
equality and development is evident. This interaction
renders women's participation in peace processes and
sustainable development mutually reinforcing. The
issue of women's security should therefore be
addressed through holistic methodologies rather than
ad hoc solutions. In that regard, while we should put
gender equality and the empowerment of women at the
core of our efforts, we should further encourage and
support their participation in the work of peace,
including post-conflict recovery efforts and the
sustainable development process.

In this context, we are particularly pleased to note
that the interconnection between security and
development has been acknowledged by the
international community in broader terms. Millennium
Development Goal 3 - promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of women - will no doubt help
emphasize the effectiveness of the efforts in this area. I
should also recall that the Programme of Action (see A/66/134) agreed on at the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least-Developed Countries in
Istanbul in May proposes a number of joint actions on
gender equality and the empowerment of women,
concrete steps to be taken jointly by least-developed
countries and their development partners.

The positive ramifications of increasing women's
participation in every context and at every stage of
political transition are widely recognized and critically
important. Situations of political transition should be
perceived as providing opportunities for enhancing
women's roles in decision-making at every level. It is
equally important to redouble our efforts to combat
impunity. Unfortunately, armed conflict and post-
conflict disorder hit women and children the hardest.
Targeted measures should be directed at the
perpetrators of sexual violence and rape. We should all
ensure that effective international mechanisms are
established to respond to such crimes and bring their
perpetrators to justice.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing my
country's strong support for the full implementation of
all Security Council resolutions on women and peace
and security. Mindful of the positive repercussions of
women's increased participatory role in global affairs,
we should strive to address the root causes of the
challenges to it. Turkey is committed to promoting the
rightful place of women in the economic, social and
political life of our society.

