Mrs. Fritsche (Liechtenstein): At the outset, I
wish to express my delegation's gratitude and
satisfaction to you, Mr. President, and to the
Government of Namibia for organizing today's open
debate on women and peace and security. You have, in
addition, chosen 24 October, United Nations Day, for
this debate, thereby underscoring the commitment of
the Security Council to pay special attention to the role
of women in preventive diplomacy, armed conflict,
peacekeeping and peace-building.

I would also like to thank Angela King and
Noeleen Heyzer for their thought-provoking statements
and the suggestions contained therein.

The United Nations engagement in peace
operations has evolved from peacekeeping in its
traditional sense towards multidimensional peace
support operations. Despite this, the gender
considerations in peace processes have not been
adequately addressed. A full understanding of the
impact of armed conflict on women and girls is
necessary in order to effectively promote and maintain
international peace and security. Women and children
constitute a disproportionate number of civilians
affected by armed conflict. An estimated 80 per cent of
all internally displaced persons and refugees are
women and children. During armed conflict, women
and girls are threatened by rape, sexual exploitation,
trafficking and sexual humiliation. Every setting
presents risks, whether at home, while fleeing or in
camps for displaced persons. Sexual violence has
devastating effects on the life of women and children,
ranging from sexually transmitted diseases and
HIV/AIDS to humiliation and trauma.

Humanitarian assistance in armed conflict should
therefore include psychosocial and reproductive health
services, and relief workers have to be trained to
respond to needs of victims of sexual violence. My
delegation would welcome the establishment of
systems for reporting on sexual violence, abuse,
exploitation and trafficking of women and girls within
military and civilian populations, to be followed by
enforcement and monitoring mechanisms for
peacekeeping personnel. It is, in our view, also
necessary to establish disciplinary and oversight
mechanisms in all peace support missions.

Peacekeeping personnel must meet the highest
standards of conduct. Training in international human
rights and humanitarian law, including gender training
and instruction on their responsibility towards civilian
communities, should be an integral part of the
preparatory process. We all know that Violations
against women and children have also been committed
by United Nations personnel. These offences must be
investigated and the offenders punished.

The authorization or perpetration of sexual
violence during armed conflict constitutes a violation
of international law. If these violations happen on a
large scale or as a matter of policy, they constitute a
crime against humanity. Historic precedents have been
set by the International Criminal Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. These Tribunals
have, for the first time in history, punished sexual
violence in a civil war and have classified rape as an
act of genocide. My delegation is very gratified at the
fact that the Statute of the International Criminal Court
will have the potential to protect and promote the
human rights of women and girls. The Statute also
addresses trauma counselling, rehabilitation and
compensation to the victims of war crimes and calls for
gender and child-sensitive court procedures.

Although the contribution of women in peace-
building, peacemaking and conflict resolution is being
increasingly recognized, the role of women in
preventive diplomacy has so far been very limited. The
Secretary-General's strategic plan of action (A/49/587)
calls for an increase in the participation of women at
decision-making levels in conflict resolution and peace
processes. The Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action stress the need for an increased participation of
women in conflict resolution at decision-making levels.
The Beijing + 5 outcome document, inter alia,
encourages the involvement of women in decision-
making at all levels and the achievement of gender
balance in the appointment of women and men with
full respect for the principle of equitable geographical
distribution, including as special envoys and special
representatives and the performance of good offices on
behalf of the Secretary-General, in matters relating to
peacekeeping, peace-building, and in operational
activities. The women Ambassadors to the United
Nations began to address this problem in 1996 by
establishing and updating a list of female candidates,
and we intend to continue our efforts to considerably
enhance the role of women in preventive diplomacy.

In this context, my delegation welcomes the
Windhoek Declaration, issued on the tenth anniversary
of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group,
which proposes that an advisory board should be set up
within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
ensure that a comprehensive database as well as
existing lists of female candidates be given due
consideration. My delegation is furthermore of the
opinion that gender issues need to be mainstreamed
into the actions that will result from this debate and, in
particular, also in the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Brahimi report,
which lacks a chapter on gender.

Every attempt towards democratization and
peace-building must be based on fundamental values,
including the principles of gender equality. Women
must therefore be participants in all peace processes
and at any stage of these processes. Today's debate is a
concrete step towards realizing this goal.

