Mr. Mulet: I am very pleased to brief the Security
Council today, as the topic of this debate is central to
our work on peace. We remain determined to protect
women and girls and to promote their role in all aspects
of peacekeeping operations.
Women always bear the brunt of any protracted
conflict, especially in displacement. Displaced
women are frequently subject to heinous human rights
violations, including sexual violence. These criminal
acts destroy community identity and tear apart
traditional ways of life, leaving women alone to face
the challenge of providing for their families. During
displacement women and girls are most at risk to sexual
and gender-based violence, especially in overcrowded
sites with little privacy and security. Uprooted from
their environments, they struggle to access support
networks and health services.

We know that the most effective and appropriate
ways of preventing violence towards internally
displaced women and girls is to intensify protection
mechanisms, while at the same time increasing support
for women's participation in political processes and
in governance. Peacekeeping missions advocate for
the political participation of women. The mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
emphasizes consultation with women on issues related
to political participation in that country. Recently,
the Mission organized a high-level women's advisory
group meeting with Mission leadership to discuss the
inclusion of women's voices in political dialogue and
national reconciliation processes. In South Sudan,
advocacy by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) has resulted in an increase in representation
and election of women as traditional leaders in Eastern
and Equatorial States.

Structural obstacles continue to exacerbate the
risks for women in camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs). In the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, we have attempted to promote the voices
of women in order to identify what structural obstacles
are in place and to reduce the direct threats to women's
security. In Haiti, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti has increased its strong uniformed
presence in IDP camps and high-crime areas where
women and girls are most at risk of sexual violence. In
South Sudan, the rapid increase ofwomen and girls who
sought shelter in United Nations bases created a strain
on camp logistics, leading to increased vulnerability
of women and girls. UNMISS therefore advocated
with the camp management committees for a gendered
approach to camp logistics and protection, resulting in
the establishment of separate facilities for women and
men and the appointment of women as camp managers.
Likewise, in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, a women's protection network was
established for residents of IDP camps around Zalingei
to discuss with women strategies to better protect and
promote their participation in the peace process.

We must recognize that the best way to protect and
support women IDPs is to help women help themselves
by giving them a voice in decision-making and the
socioeconomic resources to empower them. We need to
do more to support States in developing gender-sensitive
policies, particularly in the justice and security sectors,
that both protect and encourage women's participation
in all peace and reconciliation efforts. It is critical
for the international community to sustain all efforts
to address and remove critical obstacles that impede
women's full participation in peace and security. By
doing so, we will make sure that women are leading
actors and champions of peace.

We have a responsibility to better protect
women, but protection cannot exist without genuine
understanding of women's rights and acceptance of
their full participation, as demanded by resolution 1325
(2000) and all subsequent Security Council mandates
on women and peace and security. The protection
of women, be they settled or displaced, is possible
only when women can themselves define, shape and
influence the course of their lives and ultimately the
course ofpeace.

