Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank South Africa for organizing this debate and for
its unwavering commitment to gender equality. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the various briefers
for their presentations.

As we approach the commemoration in 2020 of
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Fourth World Conference on Women, and five years
since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, it is clear to everyone that we remain very
far from achieving the goals we have collectively set for
ourselves. Those anniversaries will unfortunately not
resonate as victories, as the initial progress registered
has been brought into doubt by a succession of crises, in
which women have often been the primary victims, and
by an unacceptable questioning of their rights. Those
commemorations should represent an opportunity
for us all to reflect on what we can do to concretely
translate our commitments into practice. The normative
framework is already there - we must implement it.

The review in 2020 of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture will be an important
step. Several significant measures have already
been undertaken. We welcome the initiatives of UN-
Women, which is a driver of change at the United
Nations and to which we renew our full support. The
Secretary-General's strategy on gender parity is also
essential and we must all mobilize to ensure that it
is fully implemented. The action plans adopted by
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Department of
Peace Operations and the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs should enable the greater
participation of women in peace operations and
negotiation processes.

Still in 2019, sexual violence continues to be used
as a weapon of war. That is intolerable and must no
longer be tolerated. As the Secretary-General states in
his report (S/2019/800), sexual Violence is being used
in particular against women who are working for peace
and the defence of human rights. The Council must
therefore react more vigorously to combat that scourge.
I commend the adoption of the action plan of the South
Sudanese armed forces to combat sexual violence in
conflict. I also welcome the decisions taken by the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel on the
matter. Those are encouraging first steps, highlighting
in particular how the Council can effectively guide the
fight against sexual violence in times of conflict. But
these are only first steps and other examples should be
pursued by all.

Resolution 1325 (2000) initiated a movement that
now needs to be accelerated. We need to rebuild the
consensus that has been weakened this year on the need
for concrete action to improve women's participation
in peace processes and their protection against sexual
Violence. In that regard, the perpetrators of sexual
Violence must no longer enjoy impunity and must all
be brought to justice. Resolution 2493 (2019), which
we have just adopted, should therefore represent an
opportunity to consolidate our achievements and move
forward together. We know that when it comes to
women's rights, whenever we stop moving forward, we
go backwards - we are never at a standstill.

France has made the implementation of resolutions
on women and peace and security a strong axis of
its action. We have supported initiatives aimed at
providing medical, psychological and social support to
survivors of sexual violence, such as the initiatives led
by Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege to set
up a fund to support the survivors of sexual violence.
We will also continue to support Panzi Hospital and to
provide a full range of health care services, including
sexual and reproductive health care, for the victims.

Finally, I wish to remind the Council that in July
2020 in Paris, in partnership with Mexico and UN-
Women, France will host the Generation Equality
Forum, which intends to give new impetus to women's
rights and gender equality. The political and economic
autonomy of women, including women's right to freely
decide about their own bodies, will be at the heart of
the Forum.

