Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China is
grateful for the briefings by Ms. Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de
Cabinet ofthe Secretary-General; Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women; and Ms. Jean,
Secretary-General of the International Organization

of La Francophonie. We also listened attentively to the
statement by the representative of civil society.

Women are an important force behind human
progress, and their cause and that of human development
are closely linked. Since the Council's adoption of the
first-ever resolution on women and peace and security,
resolution 1325 (2000), the international community
has built a strong framework for fostering a greater
role for women in peace and security and has achieved
important results and positive progress.

At the same time, we must recognize the increasing
challenges and complexities of the international security
landscape, in which we see regional conflicts come and
go like a game of whack-a-mole. More often than not,
women bear the brunt of those conflicts and suffer the
most. Much remains to be done by the international
community to protect the rights of women in situations
of conflict. Further effort needs to be made by the
international community.

First, we must intensify our efforts to prevent and
suppress armed conflicts. China supports the efforts of
the Security Council, within the limits of its mandate
under the Charter of the United Nations, to actively
encourage Member States at the political level to settle
their disputes through dialogue and consultation,
and to continue to play a greater role in preventing
conflict and maintaining peace, thereby providing
a solid foundation for the protection of women. The
international community should embrace the concepts
of peaceful development and win-win cooperation,
heed the voices and aspirations of women at all stages
of the peace process and ensure women's effective
participation in those processes so as to take advantage
of their unique role.

Secondly, we must resolutely combat violations
of women's rights in conflict and work diligently to
protect women's legitimate rights and interests. The
international community should prioritize leadership
on the part of host countries, assist them in the full
implementation of the relevant Council resolutions,
pay special attention to the needs of vulnerable groups,
such as women, and focus on ending sexual violence
in armed conflict. The international community should
respond to the threat of terrorism appropriately, work
constructively to explore effective ways to promote
international cooperation on counter-terrorism and
take comprehensive measures to protect women from
terrorist and extremist forces.

Thirdly, we must sharpen the focus on protecting
women's rights and interests during post-conflict
reconstruction. The international community,
with an eye to a broader horizon and a longer view,
should provide development assistance and technical
support to efforts to achieve gender equality and
women's empowerment in developing countries, with
the goal of eliminating the root causes of conflict
and fundamentally safeguarding women's rights
and interests. We should actively help the countries
concerned, promote economic and social development
and ensure that the dividends of development benefit
the entire population, including women, while women's
groups and civil society should be guided to enable
them to play a catalytic role to that end.

Last but not least, we must ensure that United
Nations agencies exploit their respective expertise and
strength and work together with all parties in synergy.
The Council has adopted a series of resolutions on
women and peace and security that embody consensus
and should therefore be effectively implemented. The
relevant United Nations bodies, including the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and UN-Women, should improve their
coordination of their respective mandates and cooperate
fully with regional and subregional organizations in
areas such as the exchange of experience, training,
in-country capacity-building and financing, so that
existing mechanisms can be fully utilized, their
potential exploited and their effectiveness enhanced.

China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community to continue pursuing the goals
of women and peace and security and to make greater
efforts to promote greater development of the global
women's cause.

