Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the Secretary-
General for his remarks and for his report
(S/201l/598*). I also warmly welcome to the Council
Ambassador Lazarous Kapambwe, President of the
Economic and Social Council, and Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Executive Director of UN-Women, and thank
them for their briefings. Let me also thank the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security for her intervention.

The women and peace and security agenda has
been a catalyst for greater civil society engagement
with the Council. This has enriched our work, giving
us access to new perspectives and information. In all
societies, there are real obstacles to women's political
participation. Even in countries that have championed
women's rights for decades, insidious barriers to true
equality persist. Today we gather to consider how to
advance further towards women's full engagement in
conflict resolution and mediation.

The issue of women's participation in peace talks
and other conflict-related negotiations certainly
contains more than an element of justice. It is also an
issue of effectiveness, which has a direct impact on the
success of conflict resolution and mediation efforts.
Women can bring to the table unique perspectives on
issues such as impunity, accountability, and justice. If
these perspectives are addressed in negotiations, the
chance of achieving a sustainable peace will be much
greater.

Brazil is encouraged by the progress made in
taking forward the indicators on women and peace and
security. We underline the importance of their close
adherence to the letter of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Indicators, however, are not an end in
themselves. They help us to gain a better understanding
of the situations and to assess progress made towards
our goals. In that context, we welcome and support the
strategic framework that the Secretary-General has
presented to guide the United Nations implementation
ofresolution 1325 (2000).

Last month, during the general debate and at an
event on women's political participation, President
Dilma Rousseff made it clear that the empowerment of
women is high on Brazil's agenda. We have enacted
advanced legislation on the protection of women,
established specialized police stations for women's
issues, and put women at the centre of our Bolsa
Familia cash transfer programme. These are valuable
experiences that we are ready to share with other
countries, including those emerging from conflict.

Brazil is deeply engaged in cooperation activities
with a number of countries emerging from conflict. In
Brazil, the participation of women in the decision-
making processes that deal with those issues has been
steadily increasing, in keeping with the broad trend
observed in Brazilian politics more generally, both in
the executive and legislative branches. Today, nearly a
third of the ministers in President Dilma's Cabinet are
women, including many of those charged with core
Government responsibilities. Women have also moved
to the forefront of Brazilian diplomacy, occupying
more and higher-level postings in our foreign service.
I would like to conclude by stressing a crucial
point. The Council's support to empowering women in
conflict and post-conflict situations is very important.
However, it cannot stand on its own. The effective and
sustainable political participation of women depends
on social inclusion and economic opportunity. The
work of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and UN-Women in this regard requires
our full support if we are to achieve the goals of the
women and peace and security agenda.

