Mr. Mawe (Ireland): At the outset, I would like to
align my delegation with the statement delivered earlier
on behalf of the European Union and its member States.
I would also like to thank the external speakers, and in
particular Ilwad Elman for her powerful and insightful
remarks on the situation faced by women and girls in
Somalia. And I thank you, Mr. President, for including
the vital voice of civil society in the Council.

Early intervention to prevent conflict is of course
greatly preferable to dealing with its consequences. In
that regard, Ireland warmly welcomed the adoption of
resolution 2171 (2014) in August. We continue to work
with colleagues in the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group on strengthening the Council's
conflict-prevention perspective and encouraging it
to take action at an early stage to prevent conflicts
occurring. But sadly, conflicts do occur and civilians
do get killed, wounded and displaced. Indeed, in many
cases, civilian populations are deliberately targeted.
And while the precise data has not been agreed on,
there is no doubt that as technology and weaponry
have advanced and the pattern of conflict has changed,
it is civilians and not combatants who are suffering
more and more from conflict. We therefore have to
ask ourselves how the United Nations can best act to
minimize the impact of conflict on civilians. There are
no clear answers, but we believe it is important to look
closely at the integration of human-rights priorities into
peacekeeping mandates and operations, with a special
consideration of the impact on women and girls.

We strongly support the thorough and ongoing
implementation of the Secretary-General's Rights
Up Front initiative. Breaches of human rights should
always serve both as a warning sign for potential
conflict and an indicator of the need to protect civilian
populations. We welcome the increasing integration
of human rights components into peace operations,
especially as they concern women and girls. However,
in many countries and regions, including, for example,
Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan and Nigeria, there are gross
violations of human rights, and those whose rights are
most grievously disregarded are disproportionately
female. While of course the primary responsibility lies
with the parties to a given conflict, there is, however,
a crucial role to be played by the United Nations.
Ireland believes that the knowledge, experiences and
perspectives of women should be factored into all
conflict and post-conflict discussions. We strongly
support efforts to increase the numbers of women active
in the policymaking, planning and implementation
processes related to international peace and security,
and notjust in particular conflicts but also in relation to
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control.

The United Nations must show leadership here and
play a more directive role in order to ensure that women
are fairly and fully represented in conflict resolution
and related processes. Like many other speakers, we
also believe that gender advisers should be deployed
in all United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions, and we call for the further
deployment of United Nations women protection
advisers.

The protection of civilians affected by conflict
should be at the heart of United Nations peace
operations. We look forward to the review currently
under way, focusing on how the protection of civilians
can be made a central part of the mandates of all
peace operations and ensuring that those charged with
implementing the mandates have the necessary tools
and support. For the United Nations to be credible
in protecting civilians, troops deploying to difficult
theatres to execute challenging mandates must have
the ability, means and willingness to perform their
task. We agree, for example, with the remarks made to
the Council in October (see S/PV.7275) by the Force
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz, who
stressed that all components of a mission must be
proactive and ready to take action to protect civilians.

We must also acknowledge failures to protect
civilians, such as those identified in the March 2014
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services,
which cited "a persistent pattern of peacekeeping
operations not intervening with force when civilians
are under attack" (A/68/787, summary). Some of
those failures were due to poor leadership and a lack
of accountability, which must be corrected. In that
context, I am pleased to record that Ireland is providing
funding to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to review command-and-control policy so as to address
those and other issues. As a troop-contributing country
of long standing, it is an issue that we have a strong
interest in.

It would be naive to expect that conflict can be
eliminated in the short term. It is therefore vital that the
Council and the Organization deploy their best efforts
to protect civilians, especially women and girls, who
play no part in conflict, do not support it and just wish
to avoid falling victim to it.

