Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to warmly congratulate you, Madam President,
on the assumption by your country, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.

I thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her very comprehensive
report. I also thank Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, civil society
representative in this debate. We welcome the presence
and participation this morning of eminent persons who
kindly agreed to come to New York to take part in this
debate.

This debate, whose topic is sexual violence against
women in conflict situations, is taking place in the
context of the commemoration of several legal and
political landmarks on women and peace and security.
Indeed, this year marks the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000); the thirtieth
anniversary of the third World Conference on Women,
held in Nairobi; and the twentieth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.

For African women, the year 2015 is particularly
significant because it forms part of the celebration
of the African Year of Women's Empowerment and
Development towards Africa's Agenda 2063, as well
as of the commemoration of the fifth anniversary of
the African Women's Decade 2010-2020. In the context
of these celebrations, our debate today should not be
limited to launching commemorative celebrations but,
rather, should be an objective assessment of the state
of implementation of the commitments undertaken so
as to renew our commitment with respect to this issue.

An examination of current theatres of armed
conflict and their recent evolution makes it clear that
women are among the primary Victims, who continue
to be subjected to heinous criminal acts such as rape,
sexual slavery and forced pregnancy or sterilization.
Unfortunately, Africa is affected by this scourge, as
was underscored by the three African Security Council
members and by Ms. Bangura and Ms. Allamin in their
respective presentations.

The statement made by Mrs. Jeannine Mabunda
Lioko of the Democratic Republic of the Congo spoke
volumes and was extremely instructive about the
challenges facing the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its response with respect to
this scourge, which, based on the information she gave
us, is beginning to bear fruit. Given these challenges,
the international community should pool, coordinate
and scale up its efforts so as to strengthen prevention
and suppression measures as well as tackle the root
causes of sexual violence through the promotion of
gender equality and the empowerment of women.

The African Union is making determined efforts
to combat violence against women, be it in time of war,
peace or post-conflict reconstruction. In addition to its
accession to existing international legal frameworks,
the AU in recent years has developed several legal and
political instruments relating to women and peace and
security. These include the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa; the Solemn Declaration on Gender
Equality in Africa; the gender policy adopted by the
African Union in 2009; and the proclamation of the
African Women's Decade 2010-2020.

The vision enshrined in these instruments focuses
on three areas of action: prevention, protection and
the participation of women in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes. In order to achieve that vision,
courageous steps have been taken.

First, this issue was dealt with at the highest
level of the pan-African organization by including it
on the agenda of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union.

Secondly, an annual open meeting has been
organized since 2010 in the African Union Peace and
Security Council on the issue of the vulnerability of
women and children in conflict situations in Africa.

Thirdly, in January 2014, Ms. Bineta Diop was
appointed Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security.
Since her appointment, she has undertaken missions in
several conflict zones. Moreover, the Special Envoy
was mandated by the African Union Peace and Security
Council, at its meeting on 16 December 2014, to develop
a framework for the follow-up to, and acceleration of,
the implementation of the various instruments adopted
on the continent with regard to women and peace and
security.

Fourthly, efforts were intensified to ensure strict
compliance with the principle of parity among elected
and appointed officials, in particular in the areas of
peace and security. Therefore, half of the Commission's
leaders are women, including the Chairperson of the
Commission herself, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma.
The number of women representatives and special
envoys on the ground has increased from 1 to 11 since
2014. In addition, three of the five members of the
African Union Panel of the Wise are women.

Fifthly, the African Union Commission committed
to accelerating progress in the implementation of the
African Union's programme Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020.

Sixthly, in June 2014, the African Union
Commission launched a five-year programme entitled
"Gender, Peace and Security". The programme is
designed to provide a framework for the development
of strategies and effective mechanisms to increase
women's participation in the promotion of peace and
security. It also seeks to improve the protection of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations in
Africa.

Mr. Omaish took the Chair.

In the same vein, I would like to recall the importance
of the agreement signed on the margins of the twenty-
second African Union Summit between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Department of Peace and
Security ofthe African Union. The agreement provides a
framework for establishing closer cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union in key areas
with regard to prevention and the response to sexual
violence in conflict situations in Africa. We would also
like to note that there is an existing agreement between
the African Union and UN-Women on various aspects
of the women and peace and security agenda.

In conclusion, let me stress that, despite the
persistence of several challenges, the African Union
remains determined to continue its efforts to restore the
African woman's true place as the generator of social
and economic development of our societies.

