Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on the
important issue of the elimination of sexual violence in
times of conflict. I would also like to thank the briefers
in this debate for the important information they have
given us.

Today's debate is highly symbolic, as it paves
the way for the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and marks
the tenth anniversary of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Despite the progress that has been
made in this area, our debate is an ideal opportunity for
the international community to renew its commitments
and bring greater pressure to bear so as to not lose the
ground it has gained and respond to the challenges posed
by new and emerging threats, including terrorism.

I would like to express Morocco's sincere
condolences to the Government and the people of Sri
Lanka in the wake of the terrorist attacks in the country
last Sunday.

Over the past decade, there has been a significant
paradigm shift. Today sexual violence in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations is considered a
threat to international peace and security. At the same
time, several tools have been developed to prevent and
respond to such horrific crimes through the resolutions
that followed resolution 1325 (2000). However, given
the fact that these heinous acts persist, indignation is
no longer enough. Our joint action should be further
strengthened to provide real, pragmatic and sustainable
solutions for preventing and responding more effectively
to acts of sexual violence and helping survivors rebuild
their sense of self. I would therefore like to highlight a
few points.
First, we need a more comprehensive and holistic
approach that addresses the root causes of conflict and
strengthens the inclusion of women in decision-making
processes, promotes human and sustainable
development and encourages national initiatives to end
gender discrimination. Conflict prevention is a central
pillar of the women and peace and security agenda,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals, in particular Goals
5 and 16, which give priority to conflict prevention
and demonstrate that women and peace and security
issues and development are linked, interconnected
and inseparable.

Secondly, it is important to support women's
participation in debates on conflict prevention and
resolution, the maintenance of peace and security and
post-conflict peacebuilding.

Thirdly, we must combat impunity and strengthen
access to justice for victims of sexual violence. A
policy of zero tolerance should be embraced wherever
violence occurs.

Fourthly, the stigma surrounding victims of
sexual violence and children born as a result of sexual
violence must be eradicated, as it constitutes a new
kind of victimization. They must receive support on the
medical, social and economic fronts.

Fifthly, religious leaders have an influential role
to play in combating the misleading exploitation of
religion as a justification for violence. They should
be encouraged to speak out strongly against violence.
Cooperation with local stakeholders and community
leaders is also crucial, as they can identify advance
signs of sexual violence, provide early-warning systems
and suggest appropriate prevention strategies.

Morocco firmly condemns all forms of sexual
violence, including during conflict, and considers them
barbaric, brutal and inhumane methods and practices
that have serious consequences for the process of
establishing lasting peace and reconciliation. In our
belief in the importance of the contribution of women
as a key element in early-warning mechanisms, their
awareness of threats to local security and their role
in mediation, we are actively involved in a number
of initiatives, including the Initiative on Mediation in
the Mediterranean launched by Morocco and Spain
in 2012, the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points
Network, started by Spain, and the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network, launched by Italy.
We recently organized an international conference
in Rabat on the topic of women and peace and security
that examined the role of women in mediation, conflict
prevention and the issue of deradicalization. Morocco
is actively involved in the training of imams, men and
women preachers from several African, European and
Arab countries in providing guidelines on the true
peaceful principles of religion, based on tolerance and
acceptance of others, and distanced from erroneous
interpretations or radical orientations.

We have also been actively involved in integrating
women into Morocco's contingents deployed to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Moroccan women
personnel are regularly deployed in the Royal Moroccan
Armed Forces contingents serving in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, the
fifth rapid deployment battalion has a specific unit with
a core female staff. Morocco has achieved the target of
15 per cent of mission experts and military observers in
that category.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that Morocco,
as a major contributor of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations since the 1960s, attaches
particular importance to the fight against sexual
exploitation and abuse and to the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy in that regard. To that end, we
associate ourselves fully with all actions in that regard,
including the voluntary compact on preventing and
addressing sexual exploitation and abuse and the Circle
of Leadership, which His Majesty King Mohammed
VI has joined at the invitation of the Secretary-
General. At the national level, the Moroccan judicial
system is among the strictest in this area, and many
actions have been taken, including the systematic
integration of national investigators into all deployed
contingents - which incidentally has been recognized
as an exemplary practice - the creation of a system
for rotating troops every six months, and strengthened
predeployment and awareness training.

