The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Canada,
Chile, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Finland,
Ireland, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal,
South Africa and Thailand, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Peter Wittig, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of
Germany.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Wittig to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
2
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document 8/2010/386, which contains the
progress report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
and document S/2010/466, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on women's participation in
peacebuilding.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon. Before I invite him
to take the floor, I would like to inform the Council
that we will hold informal consultations after the
statement by the Secretary-General, and that thereafter
we will resume this meeting. I now invite the
Secretary-General to take the floor.


