Mrs. Yembise (Indonesia): Let me first thank the
United Kingdom for convening today's open debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers.

Governments nowadays face increasing challenges
as the movement of people becomes more and more
prevalent and complex in nature. Conflicts, wars
and social unrest in many parts of the world have
exacerbated the complexity and have forced people to
leave their homes. The trafficking of vulnerable people,
especially women and children, who should be protected
in conflict situations, is a dreadful crime. Trafficking
in persons is a serious violation of human rights that
must continue to be condemned in the strongest sense
possible. There is an immediate obligation to identify
and provide safety and protection to victims of human
trafficking while addressing the needs of vulnerable
groups, including women and children, and taking into
account prevailing national laws and circumstances.

The problem of trafficking is cross-border in nature
and only a cross-border response and cooperation can
succeed. Indonesia is co-chair, with Australia, of the
Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in
Persons and Related Transnational Crime,. It has more
than 48 members, including international organizations.
The Bali Process recently established a Working Group
on Disruption of Criminal Networks Involved in People
Smuggling and Trafficking in Persons. During its
initial Joint Period of Action, eight countries conducted
separate but coordinated law enforcement operations
against criminal syndicates.

Indonesia is also in the process of ratifying the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Convention
Against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. Indonesia believes that coordination and
cooperation across the whole region is essential in the
handling of human trafficking.

We acknowledge the need for robust mechanisms
that promote international cooperation, including law
enforcement cooperation, mutual legal assistance and
extradition. We encourage further law enforcement
capacity-building to combat people smugglers and
human traffickers. Indonesia fully supports every
effort to stop the perpetrators of human trafficking,
especially parties that exploit the vulnerabilities of
populations affected by conflict.

The best way to narrow the chances of armed
groups, terrorists and transnational criminal networks
to exploit the vulnerabilities of civilians caught in
conflict is to de-escalate or prevent the conflict and
human trafficking.

Given the nexus between conflict-prevention
and sustaining peace, it is important to have a
comprehensive approach whereby socioeconomic
development and security challenges are addressed
simultaneously. Peacekeeping efforts should be geared
towards building trust and confidence among all parties.
Recognizing and responding to human trafficking
should be part of the training activities of humanitarian
personnel and peacekeepers. All those to be deployed
in conflict and post-conflict zones need to be trained
on the gender perspective and conflict-related crimes.
On our part, the Indonesian National Armed Forces
Peacekeeping Mission Centre at Sentul, Indonesia,
has developed and implemented an integrated gender
perspective in predeployment training for Indonesian
and regional peacekeepers.

In conclusion, let us spare no effort in fighting
human trafficking. Indonesia, as a candidate for a
non-permanent membership of the Security Council
in 2019-2020, remains committed to working with
the international community to put an end to human
trafficking and to the misery it has caused.

