Mr. Santos (Timor-Leste): Let me begin,
Mr. President, by expressing Timor-Leste's
appreciation to you for convening this open debate on
the report of Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 1820 (2008) (S/2009/362).

My country, Timor-Leste, believes it has a moral
obligation to speak out on this issue. Timorese women
lived through the worst and went through extreme
violence during our conflict. Our women have seen it
all. We hope we can honour them by helping to make
the lives of all women in all conflict settings more
secure and dignified.

Timor-Leste is of opinion that the Secretary-
General's in-depth report on the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008) is a good and comprehensive
report and an important tool for reducing the use of
sexual Violence against women. It provides critical
information on conflict situations in which sexual
violence is widely or systematically employed against
civilians and offers a number of good
recommendations aimed at minimizing the
susceptibility of women and girls to such violence.

Unfortunately, and despite repeated
condemnation, as noted in the Secretary-General's
report, Violence and sexual abuse of women and
children trapped in war zones is not only continuing,
but, in some cases, has become so widespread and
systematic as to reach appalling levels of brutality and
inhumanity. More than ever, we need to move from
words to action. We need to make sure that
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) results in
real change on the ground for women and girls at risk
of sexual violence.

The report should be seen as a landmark
opportunity and a basis on which to build
implementation. In this regard, Timor-Leste calls on
the Security Council to consider full and effective
implementation of the report's recommendations and to
consistently and substantively address the particular
concerns of women in conflict-affected situations.

Timor-Leste hopes that the Council will
specifically consider the appointment of a special
representative or special envoy for women and peace
and security. Such a person would drive coordination
of the system-wide efforts to respond to and prevent
sexual violence in armed conflict, promote action and
enhance effectiveness on the ground, and would
reinforce, support and help drive existing United
Nations efforts.

The Council should also establish a commission
of inquiry, supported by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, with
the task of investigating and reporting sexual violence
in Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan, and of making recommendations to the Council
on the most effective mechanisms for ensuring
accountability. In addition, we also recommend that the
Council establish such commissions in future conflicts
where sexual violence is prevalent.

The Council should request analysis of sexual
violence issues in all country-specific reports and
ensure that resolutions that establish or renew
peacekeeping mandates or political missions contain
provisions on the prevention of, and response to,
sexual violence, as well as corresponding reporting
requirements.

The Security Council should emphasize the need
for more systematic and effective data collection and
reporting on sexual Violence. Prevention, protection
and prosecution cannot occur without information and
analysis.

The Council should request that the Department
of Political Affairs ensure that sexual violence
dimensions are considered in all mediation processes in
which the United Nations is involved.

The Council should call on troop contributors to
strengthen pre-deployment training on ways to address
sexual violence and request that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations include this subject matter in
training advice to troop-contributing countries.

The international community has a special
responsibility to advance efforts to deal with sexual
violence in conflict settings. However, Timor-Leste
would like to highlight that Member States are

individually responsible for dealing with this issue. A
number of States have inadequate internal measures to
prevent sexual violence and protect civilians, combat
impunity for sexual violence, address continuing
discrimination against women and girls in law and in
practice, and provide proper and dignified assistance to
victims.

Let me conclude by saying that my country is
well aware that a number of these recommendations
involve important budgetary implications. However, let
me recall that women and girls are suffering. We have
the responsibility to protect them and to take real and
effective measures to put an end to their suffering, as
the Secretary-General stated early this morning, to set
our world on a course for a better future.

