Miss Durrant (Jamaica): It is a pleasure to see
you, the Foreign Minister of Namibia, presiding over
this historic open debate on women and peace and
security. My delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to you and to the delegation of Namibia
for this initiative which demonstrates your country's
commitment and your own personal commitment to the
advancement of women.

We also wish to recall the leadership you
provided as President of the twenty-third special
session of the United Nations General Assembly,
"Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century." I also wish to express
appreciation to the Secretary-General and to
Ms. Angela King, Assistant Secretary-General and
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, and to Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM), for their important statements.

The Council's treatment of the issue before us
comes in the wake of the commemoration on 8 March
of International Women's Day, when, for the first time,
the Council gave recognition to the role of women in
the peace process.

It will be recalled that the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action identified the impact of armed
conflict and other deep-rooted conflicts on women as
one of its critical areas of concern. It recognized that
the welfare of women is threatened by violence and
destructive conflicts. Peace-building work is therefore
fundamental to the health and welfare of women living
in communities and societies suffering from deep-
rooted and violent conflict.

Today's debate in the Security Council is
therefore a timely recognition of the increasingly
disproportionate effects of war on civilians,
particularly on women and children, and the important
leadership role of women in the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict. It remains a matter of
serious concern that women have become caught in the
centre of violent conflict and often become the direct
and deliberate victims of the most egregious abuses
committed by parties to armed conflict. Girls and
women continue to be victims of rape, trafficking,
forced prostitution, abduction and torture. The video
presentation we saw at the beginning of this meeting
provided a poignant reminder of the plight of so many
women throughout the world.

Despite these challenges, women have become
increasingly effective participants at the peace table
and have continued to assist in creating an enabling
environment for conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peace-building and post-conflict reconstruction. The
role of women in preserving social order and fostering
reconciliation cannot be overlooked without serious
consequences for the peace process, for, if peace is to
be actively and effectively pursued, gender-based
exclusion must be addressed. Indeed, we must
recognize that sustainable peace can hardly be achieved
if the experiences and perspectives of some 50 per cent
of the population are not given the attention they
deserve.

Yesterday, members of the Council had an
opportunity, during an Arria-formula meeting, to
exchange views with representatives of civil society.
We heard from representatives of non-governmental
organizations, working at the grass-roots level in many
countries, about the need for sustained attention to the
plight of women victims of violent conflict and their
crucial role in fostering a culture of peace in their
communities. The recommendations that emanated
from that meeting deserve the attention of the Council,
particularly because they came directly from women
who are victims, as well as participants in seeking
peace.

One of the conclusions drawn from yesterday's
discussion, which we strongly support, is the need to
ensure women's adequate representation at all levels of
the decision-making process. The role of women in
conflict prevention has in many parts of the world
proved important, and, in this context, comprehensive
and systematic measures undertaken to prevent the
resurgence or escalation of conflict by civil society,
including grass-roots women's organizations, are
particularly noteworthy and deserve the support of the
international community. We therefore support the call
by Ms. Graca Machel, to which Ms. Heyzer alluded,
for a study on women and armed conflict.

The initiatives undertaken by women in Somalia,
in Burundi, in East Timor, in Guatemala, in Sierra
Leone and in many other countries to contribute to the
creation of a peaceful and secure environment point in
many respects to the important role of women as equal
partners in securing peace. In Somalia, women have
effectively mobilized civil society to promote dialogue
among the warring factions and have given invaluable
support to the national peace process. We certainly
hope that women will find their place in the
Government when it is constituted.

These efforts, which have recently engaged the
attention of the Council, point unequivocally to the
strategic importance of women in relation to peace.
However, despite the role of women in promoting
peace and the progress made in implementing various
international agreements, much remains to be done to
ensure that women are increasingly seen as equal
partners. The Windhoek Declaration, adopted in
Namibia in May 2000, represents a valuable step in
highlighting the importance of this issue and of
mainstreaming a gender perspective into peace support
operations.

In recent assessments of United Nations peace
operations, a number of important elements which are
relevant to the incorporation of a gender dimension in
peacekeeping have unfortunately been overlooked. It is
also a matter of concern for my delegation that women
are still under-represented in decision-making in the
area of conflict resolution. It is in this context that,
while we recognize the important recommendations
contained in the Brahimi report, we call for the
implementation of these recommendations, including,
where appropriate, the participation of women at all
levels.

My delegation recognizes the steps that the
Secretary-General has taken to appoint women as
special representatives and special envoys, but we
believe that much more needs to be done, and in this
we call upon Member States, because it is Member
States that have a responsibility to present for
consideration qualified women for appointment at high
levels.

It is important not only to address the conceptual
and structural framework of peace operations but also
to ensure that attention is given to those institutional
elements which determine the participation of those
with the capacity to make a difference. The record of
women in conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peace-
building should certainly be taken into account.

My delegation fully supports the view that
comprehensive gender considerations should be
incorporated into peacekeeping missions. In support of
this approach, Member States should ensure that they
increase the number of women in their military and
civilian police forces who are qualified to serve in
peace operations. Additionally, Member States need to
ensure that gender sensitivity is incorporated into their
national training programmes for military and civilian
police designated to participate in peacekeeping.

The sensitization of personnel to the needs and
vulnerabilities of women is critical and must be
complemented by concrete steps to deal promptly with
violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law committed by peacekeeping
personnel, particularly those against women and girls.
Personnel involved in United Nations peace-building
activities should also be given appropriate training on
the protection and rights of women as a matter of
priority.

In this connection, we note the existence of
gender focal points in some United Nations missions,
including in East Timor, Kosovo and Sierra Leone,
and, based on the lessons learned in these missions, we
believe that consideration must be given to establishing
gender units in all peacekeeping missions. Ending
impunity for sexual and gender-based violence in
situations of conflict remains a matter for priority
attention. Crimes such as rape, sexual torture, forced
impregnation and sexual slavery continue to represent
serious violations of the rights of women. My
delegation welcomes the fact that the International
Criminal Court has defined these crimes as grave
breaches of international law. We stress the importance
of bringing to justice those who violate the rights of
women, and we note the attention that has been given
to prosecuting such crimes in the International
Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia.

It is not only important that women be allowed to
participate in peace operations, but that they be given
special attention in reconstruction and post-conflict
peace-building initiatives. Given that women have been
particularly victimized during conflict, special
attention also needs to be given to their needs and
potential in formulating and implementing national
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development
programmes. In this context, the Council must ensure
that special attention is given to the needs of women in
reintegration and post-conflict reconstruction. The
involvement of refugee and internally displaced women
in the design and management of humanitarian
activities represents also an important element. The full
implementation of gender mainstreaming in the post-
conflict reconstruction period should not be
overlooked.

We would like to commend the Secretary-General
for his commitment and initiatives aimed at integrating
a gender sensitive approach within the Organization.
This was emphasized in the report to the Millennium
Assembly. It is also in this context that we welcome the
report on Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective In
Multidimensional Peace Operations, prepared by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in cooperation
with the Department for the Advancement of Women.

We wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General
King for presenting the results of this study to the
Council this morning. The study emphasizes the impact
that the participation of women can have on United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We also thank her for
the recommendations for future action, which the
Council will consider later this month in the context of
the draft resolution we expect to adopt. As the Beijing
Platform for Action so aptly reminds us, in a world of
continuing instability and violence, the implementation
of cooperative approaches to peace and security is
urgently needed. Women cannot be left out of the
equation.

Today, as we celebrate United Nations Day, it is
fitting that we draw attention to the role of women as
agents for the promotion of peace, security and
development. The time has come for us to move from
rhetoric to action. The women of the world expect no
less from the Security Council.

