Mrs.Sudmalis (Australia):Thereisno one-size-fits-
all solution to ensuring women's meaningful
participation in peace processes. We need research and
to share knowledge to translate the theoretical concepts
ofthe women and peace and security agenda into action
and good practice. We need to identify solutions and
approaches that are context-specific, inclusive and
informed by experience, especially that of local actors.

Australia welcomes the report of the Informal
Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security and its
recommendations, and commends the work of the experts
who contributed to it. Towards an Inclusive Peace, an
Australian-funded research project in partnership with
Australia's universities, focuses on women and peace
and security in the Indo-Pacific region. That research,
which also informed the Expert Group's report, shows
that one of the most crucial factors in securing lasting
peace agreements is the active presence of women's
civil-society organizations. Women's organizations
are on the ground before, during and after conflicts.
They help mediate and resolve conflicts and rebuild
community relations and trust in institutions. Yet
women's organizations in our region tell us that it is only
when women enter the post-conflict security sector or
Government that their governance skills, capacities and
qualities are fully appreciated.

Australia is proud to be the founding and largest
donor to the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund
in support of women's grass-roots organizations.
We are also proud to support UN-Women's Global
Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action. The research also
shows that women's meaningful participation is rarely
adequately supported or funded. Too often institutional
arrangements exclude women from key processes, and
stand-alone measures such as quotas are not enough
in isolation. Women from our region are seeking
practical responses. Access to childcare, safe transport
and toilets, consulting with women on the timing of
meetings and funding travel for companions or carers
are among their suggestions. They also seek protection
from and an end to the violence that they face from
those who oppose their activism and leadership.

Australia is also researching the gendered
dimensions of violent extremism in the region and
the various roles that women play and could play in
countering extremism and promoting stability and
inclusion. All of those research findings will inform
Australia's second national action plan, expected in
mid-2019.

Australia has greatly progressed its military gender
adviser capability. We have trained 101 Australian
military gender advisers to deploy on operations and
exercises. We have established 10 full-time gender-
adviser positions dedicated to mainstreaming and
integrating a military gender perspective in Australia.
We have also established four permanent deployed
gender-adviser positions, including the first Gender
Adviser to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.

A commitment to peace demands a commitment to
women's meaningful participation in peace efforts. We
stand ready to learn more and to share our knowledge
of the meaningful actions that we can take to secure
and ensure genuinely inclusive peace.

