Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation is grateful to you, Mr. President, for having
taken the welcome initiative of organizing this public
discussion on the topic of women, peace and security,
which coincides with the commemoration of the sixth
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on this issue.
First of all, let me express the full gratitude of my
delegation to the Secretariat for the quality and clarity
of the report submitted to us after only eight months of
the initial implementation and integration of the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security. We also welcome the quality and
depth of the analysis given us this morning by
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General, Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), Ms. Carolyn McAskie, Assistant
Secretary-General, Peacebuilding Support Office, and
by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations.

My delegation generally welcomes the efforts
made by the various entities in the United Nations and
in Member States that have sought to implement the
resolution and the Plan of Action. Resolution 1325
(2000) was historic, since it was the first Security
Council resolution to deal exclusively with the issue of
women in the context of international peace and
security. It was the outcome of years of sustained
efforts by non-governmental organizations,
Governments and the United Nations. It defined a
complete programme for women, peace and security,
by emphasizing, inter alia, the need for full and equal
participation of women in peacebuilding processes and
activities and in gender-specific training for staff
participating in peacekeeping operations. The
resolution also recognizes that armed conflicts affect
women disproportionately and in a special way. It
rightly encourages Member States to give all
peacekeeping operations personnel special training on
male-female relations and ensure adequate
representation for woman in all decision-making.

Women are, in most cases, excluded from peace
negotiations, in spite of the basic role they play in the
prevention of conflicts and in peacebuilding within
their communities. The number of women taking part
in official negotiations remains limited. Parties to the
conflict are, by and large, men, and it is men who, as
warriors, sit down around the negotiation table in order
to deal with matters that are considered by some to be
too serious to be entrusted to peacemakers.

So much the better, we might say, if the image of
women were not linked with that of the heroes of the
bloodthirsty tales of yore that are so typical of banal
machismo, and so much the better if women, in and of

themselves, only promoted life and were totally foreign
to barbaric warfare. But, without claiming that all
women are angels, we still need to establish in the role
and place of women in society what relationship they
have to peace and security, since no one, neither men
nor women, is spared the impact of our common
misadventures. Every country and region throughout
the world has, if not a full-blown chronicle, at least a
hint of such an experience.

The work of the United Nations in this area will
only be enhanced if it is coordinated with that carried
out by States. By basing its thinking on the Beijing
Plan of Action and resolution 1325 (2000), Congo has
endeavoured to include a gender-specific approach in
all sectors of public life. As a result, Congolese women
are involved in the process for the International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region. They are
playing an active role in the work of thematic groups
and in meetings of the regional preparatory committee.
They recently played a dynamic role in a meeting of
women from the Great Lakes region regarding peace
and security. That gathering took place from 6 to 8
February 2006 at Kinshasa and concluded with the
adoption of a declaration.

Aware of what is at stake with regard to women's
participation in the decision-making process, the
Government, working through the department
responsible for promoting the status of women and in
cooperation with its development partners and civil
society, has developed strategies to encourage the
participation of Congolese women in the forthcoming
elections.

Having been the theatre of successive civil wars
from 1993 to 2002, my country fully understands the
great price paid by women and young girls in conflict
situations. Accordingly, my Government recognizes the
need for the full participation of women at every stage
of the peace process, in particular in the negotiation
and implementation of agreements. Similarly, we are
considering measures to protect this vulnerable sector
of society from all sorts of violence, especially sexual
violence.

Rape continues to take place today in such
tragedies as the one taking place in Darfur. Rape
continues to serve as a brutal weapon in warfare
against women and children, whether in Africa or
elsewhere. What we have seen occur in recent years in
Rwanda, Liberia, Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Afghanistan and Kosovo
clearly points to the multidimensional nature of the
victimization of women, who face wanton and
systematic violence as a result of various ideologies.
The result is physical, psychological, emotional and
social injury that gradually erodes cultural values and
social relations, thereby damaging the cohesion and
stability of local communities.

It is for that reason that my delegation took note
with great interest of the fact that the report
(S/2006/770) of the Secretary-General on women,
peace and security takes into account gender-specific
issues in the major operational areas of action of the
Plan, including conflict prevention and early warning,
the restoration and consolidation of peace,
peacekeeping operations, humanitarian efforts, post-
conflict recovery, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the prevention and prosecution of sexual
violence in armed conflict and the prevention and
punishment of exploitation and sexual abuse
committed by personnel. The inclusion of gender-
specific policies in all those areas should make it
possible for us to have statistics broken down by sex,
which could give us a clearer idea of existing gaps.
That should, in turn, promote the implementation of
appropriate solutions while taking into account the
specific situation of women as regards peace and
security.

However, despite the encouraging results outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General, there are still
many gaps in the implementation of the Action Plan,
both within the United Nations and at the level of
Member States. In that regard, while my delegation
endorses the recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-General aimed at speeding up the
implementation of both the Action Plan and resolution
1325 (2000), we are still concerned about contradictory
trends towards centralization or decentralization of the
mechanisms to manage gender policy and gender
equality within the United Nations itself. My
delegation believes that this issue merits further
consideration, with a view to achieving balance,
coherence and effectiveness in the area of peace and
security.

Pending the issuance of the report of the High-
level Panel on United Nations System-wide Coherence
in the Areas of Development, Humanitarian Assistance
and the Environment, my delegation believes that the

new cycle for results-based planning constitutes an
interesting approach. Nevertheless, we reserve the right
to make further comments in due course following the
conclusions reached through that important
undertaking.

With regard to financing, we should also consider
the best ways to adapt resources to priorities. Only
flexible, predictable and diligent financing that is
based on real needs will make it possible to achieve
objectives on the ground. My delegation would
therefore like to take this opportunity to appeal to the
entire international community to make further efforts
to fund activities focused on women, peace and
security.

We also approve of the establishment of ethics
and discipline teams in peacekeeping operations. We
reiterate our support for the zero-tolerance policy in
place to address sexual abuse by staff in peacekeeping
missions.

Although the progress made has not met our
expectations, my delegation believes that more
significant progress in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) is not beyond our grasp. That can only be
possible, however, through a collective response
adapted to real needs. In that regard, my delegation
supports the draft presidential statement on women and
peace and security proposed by the delegation of Japan
for adoption at the conclusion of this meeting.

In conclusion, I should not like to end without
referring to the comprehensive dimension of gender
issues, which in many respects are part of current
concerns about the role of civil society in making
proposals and as regards accountability. Gender
concerns are among those issues that are often referred
to as cross-cutting, as they transcend a number of
institutional and thematic borders. If not carefully
considered, the manner in which they are dealt with
may give rise to adverse results. Examples include
praiseworthy efforts at affirmative action that
sometimes lead to genuine ghettoization, and action to
advance the social standing of the so-called
disadvantaged that is used as a convenient excuse to
ease the conscience.

It is therefore up to politicians, institutions and
actors in society to constantly try to eliminate all
ambiguities as to the need to make gender first and
foremost a human rights problem. In so doing, we

could establish objective links - free of any
06-58804
condescension or discrimination - between

development, combating poverty, accountability and
reducing all types of marginalization, as components
conducive to promoting the voices and participation of
women in society.

There is no doubt that women continue to be
burdened by their geographical and cultural
environment and the legacy of history. In that regard,
human beings can only be defined in their complexity
and diversity. What is important is to allow the full
potential of that diversity to manifest itself as
appropriately as possible in an effort to mobilize the
resources, skills and motivation that today's world
needs to lend an ever-more humane character to our
efforts to address our common challenges.

