Ms. Pillay: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to address this open debate on women and
peace and security. I shall briefly address four main
points: first, the situation of women's human rights in
conflict; secondly, ensuring that gender considerations
are taken into account during transitional justice
processes, and making sure there is accountability
for crimes suffered by women; thirdly, the value of
comprehensive human rights-based approaches to
transitional justice; and, lastly, much-needed efforts
to create closer links between the peace and security,
human rights and development agendas to fully seize
the opportunity offered by transitional justice processes
for women.

First, the protection of women's human rights in
conflict remains a challenge. Let me provide just a
couple of examples. In September, the International
Commission of Inquiry on Syria submitted its most
recent report to the Human Rights Council, which
stressed the prominent role that the use and threat of
sexual violence were playing in the conflict. The report
also showed how vulnerable the women and girls in
refugee camps were to sexual exploitation, forced
marriage and trafficking.

Also in September, I reported to the Human Rights
Council on the fact-finding mission of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to the Central African Republic, which reported
a high rate of sexual violence against women. Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan Simonovie
visited the Central African Republic in August and
confirmed those findings. The Human Rights Council
has adopted a resolution establishing a Special
Rapporteur on the Central African Republic. My Office
will encourage close attention to the situation of women
and girls in the work of that mandate.

Secondly, the establishment of the rule of law and
transitional justice processes are crucial to ensuring
accountability and delivering justice, truth and
reparations for violations suffered by women. They are
also crucial to deter the continuation of such violations
in future. Today we observe considerable progress in
several areas.

The full, free and informed participation of women
in national consultations is increasingly regarded as
instrumental for the design and implementation of
comprehensive, context-specific, gender-sensitive
transitional justice strategies. To give just one
example, at the beginning of October, the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights visited Yemen and
commended the authorities for conducting a national
dialogue in which 30 per cent of the participants were
women.

Increasingly, the mandates, compositions and
operations of truth and reconciliation commissions
and similar bodies are designed to ensure that
women's and girls' experiences are taken into account.
In his recent report to the Human Rights Council,
the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth,
justice, reparations and guarantees of non-recurrence
highlighted the increased attention being paid by truth
commissions to women's rights.

Similarly, there have been increasing efforts to
systematically include gender considerations in the
work of commissions of inquiry, including having
experts on gender appointed to the secretariats of the
ongoing commissions of inquiry working on Syria
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Given
the role that those mechanisms can play in laying the
ground for transitionaljustice processes, such expertise
can make an important contribution to bringing about
gender-sensitive justice and redress. We closely
collaborate with UN Women in that area.

There is now much greater recognition of the need
for and the potential of gender-sensitive reparations.
My Office has undertaken consultations with survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda, and Kosovo as per
resolution 1244 (1999). We have produced reports that
include recommendations to inform reparations effforts
there. In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, my Office is concluding a pilot project that
consists of grants to five local organizations to provide
support and assistance to survivors of sexual violence.
A guidance note on reparations for victims of conflict-
related sexual violence is being prepared jointly by my
Ofice and UN Women, which will be available shortly.

In several countries, there have been targeted
efforts to encourage the prosecution of perpetrators
of sexual and gender-based violence. For example,
the Joint Human Rights Office of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has supported legal clinics that
represent victims of sexual violence. It has also trained
police, prosecutors and magistrates to better handle
sexual violence investigations and trials. As a result
of those and other efforts, an increasing number of
convictions has been registered. While all that progress
is encouraging, we must also be aware that there is
still a long, hard road ahead before we can claim to
be providing justice, accountability and seizing the
potential of transitional justice processes for women
fully.
Thirdly, as we continue to advance along that
road, we must focus our efforts within international
human rights norms and standards, including the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). I join the
Secretary-General and Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka
in noting the importance of a resolution adopted this
morning in Geneva by the CEDAW Committee, which
is a general recommendation on women in conflict
prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations. I
support the Committee's view that efforts to ensure
judicial accountability and to uncover the truth about
past violations must take into account a whole range of
violations, as well as the underlying structural sexual
and gender-based discrimination that made them
possible. I also believe that, according to the spirit and
letter of CEDAW and other human rights instruments,
efforts to halt violations must be framed around an
obligation to address structural and systemic gender
inequality and discrimination through comprehensive
legislative, policy and institutional reforms.

Developments in the Middle East and North
Africa region exemplify the need for transitional
justice processes and institutional reforms that are
mindful of the interdependence and interrelatedness
of human rights. In some countries of that region,
women parliamentarians face fierce opposition when
they propose laws that address women's rights, while
in others public spaces for women are shrinking due to
threats and intimidation. It is crucial that while we look
into quotas and other mechanisms to support women's
participation in political systems in countries emerging
from conflict, we also need to consider how illiteracy,
poverty, discrimination and violence conspire to
prevent their effective participation.

My Office will raise awareness about CEDAW's
new general recommendation and promote its
implementation. My Office will also submit to the
Human Rights Council at its September 2014 session an
analytical study on gender-based and sexual violence in
relation to transitionaljustice. Those are ongoing efforts
to ensure that the human rights reports and briefings
that reach this Council fully integrate women's rights,
including through specialized capacity-building tools
and activities for human rights officers. My Office, in
cooperation with UN Women, is also undertaking an
internal lessons-learned exercise on the provision of
gender and sexual and gender-based violence expertise
to commissions of inquiry in order to help further
progress in ensuring that their work is gender-sensitive.

Finally, I fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for closer links between the United
Nations peace and security, human rights and
development work. A human-rights-based approach
is crucial to successfully address the root causes of
conflict and threats to women's security. It is also crucial
to seize the opportunity offered by transitions, which
include transforming gender relations, dismantling
negative gender stereotypes, reforming legislation that
discriminates against women, supporting women's
autonomy in private and public spaces and, eventually,
building just and equal societies where peace and
development can prosper.

