Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate
on women and peace and security, with a focus on the
important topic of displaced women and girls. I also
congratulate you on your successful presidency of the
Security Council this month.

The United Arab Emirates welcomes the
comprehensive presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/21)
adopted by Council members by consensus this
morning. We join others in thanking the Secretary-
General for his recent report (S/2014/693), which
provides important information on the progress made
thus far and the considerable challenges that remain
in the full implementation of the agenda. We would
also like to thank Executive Director of UN-Women
Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for her bold call to action. In
addition, we would like to thank this morning's briefers
for their thoughtful and important presentations.

Today's open debate is focused on displaced
women and girls, which is of the utmost importance as
new crises and outbreaks of violence increase the levels
of forced displacement. Today's 51 million refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) represent the
largest number of refugees, asylum-seekers and IDPs
since the Second World War; three quarters of the
displaced persons are women and children.

Many here present have acknowledged today in
their statements that as Member States we must work
together to address this issue. We must ensure consistent
leadership to strengthen the meaningful participation
of and leadership opportunities for women, including
in tackling the root causes and impacts of displacement.
We need to ensure the consistent and effective
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security.

Within the United Nations system, we need to
encourage further gender-sensitive conflict analysis
and stand by our women and peace and security
commitments so that we can best understand the
progress that has been made, as well as the challenges
that remain in implementation.

Through those actions, we the Member States can
do our part to ensure that the women and peace and
security agenda remains central to efforts to achieve
our shared goal of international peace and security.

It has been 14 years since the historic adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), whereby the international
community formally recognizes the vital role played
by women in the prevention, mitigation and resolution
of conflict, in addition to recognizing the differential
burden borne by women and girls during conflict.

Much progress has been made in the field of women
and peace and security. Within the United Nations
system, the women and peace and security agenda has
been increasingly integrated. The data in the Secretary-
General's report shows important progress. In terms of
prevention, there is more consistent attention to women
and peace and security in Security Council deliberations;
three quarters of United Nations resolutions adopted in
2013 contained women and peace and security related
references.

Under the protection pillar, there have been
improvements in peacekeeping mission mandates and
monitoring and training, with clear directives calling
for the increased participation of women in the ranks of
United Nations police and military.

At the level ofreliefand recovery, there has also been
an increased focus on women's economic empowerment
in peacebuilding, with a growing recognition of the
importance of post-conflict economic stability in
resolution 2122 (2013) and in the declaration adopted
in 2013 by the Peacebuilding Commission on women's
economic empowerment. The resolutions recognize
that women's economic empowerment generates long-
term social dividends, as evidence shows that women
tend to reinvest up to 90 per cent of their income back
into their families. The economic security of women
in post-conflict situations is therefore fundamental to
ensuring lasting peace and stability.

Yet many challenges remain. Today's statements
recognize that unacceptable lags remain in the
implementation of widely accepted norms, despite the
clear presence ofpolitical will. For example, while there
has been increased global attention towards sexual
violence in conflict, much work remains to ensure that
this attention is translated into action, including justice
and assistance for the victims.

Widespread violations of international humanitarian
law continue worldwide, as do the challenges in
ensuring the protection of civilians. The culture of
impunity remains widespread. As many Member States
have recognized, we are also navigating a shifting
security context where the rise of violent extremism
has led to increased and targeted violence against
women and girls, which is unacceptable to the United
Arab Emirates and all responsible Member States.

Although this is a global reality, it is a particularly
urgent problem in our region. In Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon,
Syria and Turkey, four out of five refugees and displaced
persons are women or children. Within Syria, there
are 4.25 million internally displaced persons, with
6.8 million in need ofhumanitarian assistance. We note
the important data brought to light by the September
report of the International Rescue Committee on the
plight of Syrian women and children. The collection
of data must remain a priority for the international
community to further bolster our arguments and ensure
that justice prevails - without exception - for all.

The numbers of the forcibly displaced continue
to rise daily and require our urgent attention, with
many fleeing today to neighbouring States. Displaced
persons comprise one fifth of Lebanon's population.
In Jordan, the Zaatari refugee camp is Jordan's third
largest city, in terms of sheer numbers. The pressure on
host communities is enormous, with ramifications in
neighbouring countries as well.

The United Arab Emirates has tried to play its part
and has taken measures to address the needs of those
forcibly displaced and to prevent and protect women
from violence at international and regional levels.

The United Arab Emirates has built the Mrajeeb
Al-Fahood refugee camp at the Jordanian border, for
Syrian refugees, exclusively for married couples,
children and women. The family-focused nature of the
camp has helped to protect women from harassment,
extra-marital violence and exploitation and has served
to reduce overall levels of violence towards women and
children within the camp.

The United Arab Emirates is also committed to
advocacy within the United Nations. We have launched
a panel series on women and peace and security in
partnership with UN-Women and the Georgetown
Institute for Women, Peace and Security in support of
the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The series aims to address the challenges
associated with the implementation of the resolution and

to identify emerging issues and generate opportunities
to further the goals of the women and peace and security
agenda.

Yesterday our panel discussion explored the many
roles that women play both in countering violent
extremism and also, sometimes, as protagonists in
its spread. The discussion was nuanced, but some
clear recommendations and themes emerged. First,
women must be included at the conceptual stage in the
development of effective strategies to counter violent
extremism. Secondly, we must acknowledge that
women are not a homogenous group, and our approach
should reflect that. Thirdly, we need to create the
political spaces for the many voices of women to be
heard. That is the space where we may find solutions
in local and culturally specific contexts. Fourthly, we
must recognize women as the agents of change that they
are, and not solely as victims. Fifthly, we must always
challenge the dominant narrative that views violent
extremism through a strictly security-focused lens.

By linking women's roles in strategies to counter
violent extremism with security issues, we run the
risk of further marginalizing women and women's
organizations. We need to take a more holistic
approach to forced displacement, where we look
outside of conventional security approaches and focus
on the development and everyday needs of the forcibly
displaced. By addressing the everyday needs, we can
help create an environment that allows for women, their
families and communities to fully participate in the
prevention of violent extremism in their own societies.
Finally, we must continue to call for increasing funding
for data collection and reporting to ensure that what
is emerging as consensus in the conversation on the
women-peace-security nexus is reinforced by hard
facts.

The United Nations remains the central forum
for addressing the women and peace and security
agenda. Much progress has been made through the
continual, concerted efforts of UN-Women and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in addressing the gender-specific needs of
internally displaced persons and refugees. The United
Arab Emirates stands with our United Nations and
international partners in that important endeavour and
urges for 2015 to be the year where we move the dial
forward in a significant way.

