Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): Celebrating
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) in the current context means recognizing
the indispensable role women play in development
and peace. The resolution's unanimous adoption, and
the six resolutions that subsequently strengthened it,
sent a strong and clear message to the international
community: the threats and violations of human rights
against women in conflict and post-conflict situations
are unacceptable. They are daughters, sisters, wives and
mothers. They are women who have been brutalized,
raped, exploited, enslaved or forced into prostitution.

The global study and its indicators have highlighted
women's vulnerability, which has worsened as conflicts,
violent extremism and terrorism have proliferated. The
recommendations of the high-level advisory group and
the outstanding and untiring efforts of UN-Women are
more relevant than ever at a time when we are reviewing
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations as well as
celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Platform of Action.

We must build on the considerable progress that
has already been made on the women and peace and
security agenda. With their assistance and experience,
the United Nations agencies and the organizations in
the field, particularly the International Committee of
the Red Cross, have made a substantial contribution
by implementing our commitments and sharing their
expertise. The determination of all these actors, to
whom Monaco pays tribute, has helped to mobilize the
international community as a whole. That collective
effort is crucial if we are to achieve gender equality,
empower women and girls and promote effective
institutions, peaceful societies and access to justice, all
Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
To that end, we recognize that educating girls and
women and supporting civil society are priorities.

It is therefore essential that we support the
participation of women and gender experts in conflict
prevention and not merely in peace negotiations and
peacebuilding. Similarly, the judicial proceedings of
our international tribunals should help to strengthen
the fight against impunity and ensure zero tolerance
for those who perpetrate sexual and gender-based
violence. Justice for victims should help to rebuild
not only the victims themselves but also their families
and communities and can also contribute to ending
stigmatization of victims.

Finally, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Spanish presidency
of the Council. Monaco is a sponsor of resolution 2242
(2015), which we adopted today and which breathes
new energy into the political commitment of Member
States and the United Nations to the agenda on women
and peace and security. We will continue to support
UN-Women.

