Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank the French presidency for its initiative
in holding today's open debate. I also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Special Representative Bangura
and Special Rapporteur Giammarinaro for their
briefings. I also express my thanks for the briefing by
the representative of civil society.

Local conflicts are currently ongoing. Conflict-
related sexual violence, including trafficking in
persons, especially in women and girls, is a very serious
matter. Parties to conflicts are using such activities as
trafficking in persons to raise funds and are utilizing
sexual violence as a weapon of war. Vulnerable groups,
such as women and girls, have become victims and
bear the brunt. As victims, their lives, security, health
and dignity are seriously threatened. China strongly
condemns and resolutely opposes all forms of conflict-
related sexual violence, including trafficking in
persons, especially in women and girls. We support
the international community's adoption of a zero-
tolerance policy and its effective implementation of
S/PRST/2015/25, which comprehensively addresses
trafficking in persons, especially in women and girls
in armed conflict. China would like to highlight the
following points.

First, there is a need to put an end to wars and
conflicts as soon as possible in order to achieve peace
and development in conflict areas. That would serve
to eradicate the phenomenon of conflict-related sexual
violence, including trafficking in persons, especially
in women and girls, at its roots. The parties concerned
should adhere to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations by engaging in dialogue
and consultation to settle their disputes peaceably. The
international community should attach importance
to economic reconstruction and development in post-
conflict countries, facilitate the empowerment of
women and comprehensively raise the status of women
by allowing women to become the masters of their own
destinies and serve as a significant force in promoting
the development of their countries.

Secondly, we must scale up efforts to fight the
forces of terrorism and Violent extremism. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other terrorist
organizations take advantage of local conflicts to raise
funds by trafficking in women and girls and engaging
in sexual slavery and exploitation, as well as using
sexual violence as a weapon of war. That is very cruel.
Any and all acts of terrorism - wherever, whenever, by
whosoever committed and for whatever motives - are
unforgivable crimes. The international community
should effectively implement political commitments,
adhere to a uniform standard, resolutely counter
all forms of terrorism and strengthen international
coordination on counter-terrorism.

Thirdly, there is aneedto fully respect the sovereignty
of the affected countries and leverage the leading role of
such countries. They are the main parties responsible for
protecting their nationals. They must bear the primary
responsibility for protecting women and girls and
countering trafficking in persons, especially in women
and girls. The international community should support
the countries affected in adopting countermeasures in
the light of their particular conditions and effectively
counter trafficking in persons, in particular in women
and girls. Against the backdrop of the needs of the
countries affected, the international community should
also provide them with assistance, in terms of financial,
human and technical resources, as well as strengthen
their capacity-building in combating trafficking in
women and girls in conflicts, so as to enable the victims
to access social and medical assistance.

Fourthly, there is a need to bolster international
cooperation in countering trafficking in persons,
especially in women and girls. At present, trafficking
in women and girls has generated a chain of interests
involving countries of origin, transit and destination. It
is only through close coordination and full cooperation
among the relevant countries and international
organizations that we can hope to really break that
chain of interests and effectively crack down on this
transnational crime. At the same time, trafficking in
persons, especially in women and girls, in conflict
areas touches on several elements, including the
empowerment of women, child protection, education,
employment and health. The relevant countries and
international organizations should extend a helping hand
and provide assistance, both material and financial. The
World Trade Organization, UN-Women and UNICEF,
as well as other organizations, should provide victims
with medical, legal and psychosocial assistance to help
them to better reintegrate into society.

Protecting women's rights and promoting gender
equality constitute the concrete embodiment of progress
in human society and civilization. China attaches great
importance to the protection of women's rights. Last
September, China and UN-Women jointly sponsored
the Global Summit on Women. The international
community reaffirmed the solemn commitment to the
Beijing Declaration and Programme of Action. While
implementing the outcome of the Global Summit
on Women, China stands ready to continue to work
with the international community in jointly fostering
an international environment of peace, security and
stability, effectively protecting the rights and interests
of women and girls and eradicating conflict-related
sexual violence, including trafficking in persons,
especially in women and girls.

