Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution
2272 (2016) today. I pay tribute to Samantha for her
determination and courage in bringing this difficult
issue to the Security Council.

Like so many in the chamber yesterday, I was
appalled by the sickening crimes detailed in our meeting
(see S/PV.7642) on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/729). Alhough I was shocked, sadly I cannot
say that I was surprised. Horrific allegations against
peacekeepers have surfaced almost every year for over
two decades - in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in C6te
d'Ivoire, in Haiti, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and now inthe Central African Republic. The most
harrowing abuse demands the most steadfast response.
Each and every victim could tell us that for too long
our response has fallen short. Today I hope that finally
we have turned the page and begun to make amends.
We cannot be having this discussion again - not in 20
years' time, not in one year's time. What we need now is
swift and systematic implementation of this resolution,
implementation that brings justice for the victims and
ends the sickening cycle of impunity. This is not about
collective punishment, nor about penalizing the many
for the sick acts of the few. This is about taking serious
action in the face of serious allegations, about acting
decisively against any pattern of abuse in any part of
the world.

It is deeply regrettable that there was no unanimity
and that there was an attempt to weaken the resolution
through a draft amendment. What does that say to
the victims, the women and girls whom we heard so
poignantly about yesterday, that some members of this
Council would seek to weaken our response, rather
than endorse meaningful action? The United Kingdom
voted against the draft amendment because not holding
perpetrators accountable is unacceptable. Had the draft
amendment succeeded, the Secretary-General would
not have had a lever to apply pressure for accountability.

I want to conclude with the words of a teenage girl
from Bangui. Speaking to ajournalist earlier this year,
she said:

"Sometimes when I am alone with my baby

I think about killing him. He reminds me of the

man who raped me." (The Washington Post, 
27 February 2016)

Those are difficult words to read in the Council, but
this is the reality of sexual exploitation and abuse. It is
a reality created by a peacekeeper who was entrusted
to help, not harm, that teenage girl. It is a reality that
we simply cannot shy away from. We must confront it
and we must end it. This resolution today is a vital step
towards doing so.

