Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate and for this morning's briefings by the
representatives of the Secretariat, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and civil society.

The relevance of today's debate is clear when we
look at the news of humanitarian crises that dominate
the international media. The numbers show that 2014
has the dishonourable distinction of having been the
year that produced the greatest number of displaced
persons and refugees globally since the Second World
War, with approximately 51 million people having
been pushed far from their homes, uprooted from
their surroundings, stripped of everything and pushed
to foreign lands, in which women, facing the sadness
of having lost everything, represent, together with
children, the greatest number of Victims. That situation
of course presents countless challenges at all levels,
both to the emergency organizations and the response
system of the United Nations and other agencies and to
the capacity of the affected Governments to respond, in
terms of both human and economic resources.

Furthermore, the factors that create situations
of vulnerability for women and girls in situations of
armed conflict are not the same as in the past, where
risks derived from international conflicts or foreign
interventions. In fact, the number of those types of
conflicts has declined by about 80 per cent over the
past 20 years. From an average of seven international
conflicts each year, between 1946 and 1967, we have
gone to less than one per year on average since the start
of the millennium. It is for that reason that Member
States and the Security Council must confront instances
of such violence with measures that are adapted to the
specific nature of the new perpetrators, who in many
cases are groups that are outside the law, that show a
total disregard for international norms and legislation
and that, in any case, do not respond in the same way
as States.

Colombia has experienced that at first hand. Having
traversed for five decades the bloody path of the self-
degradation ofinternal armed conflict, it became clear,
in seeking solutions to such phenomena, that our focus
should be comprehensive and that support for victims
should be constant. Therefore, the political commitment
of the Government of President Santos Calderon from
the beginning, and even before the start of the peace
talks in Havana, included prioritizing victims through
the victims and land restitution law. In that broad legal
framework, there began the development of public
policies that prioritized Colombian women, children
and adolescent victims of the conflict. Colombia has
understood that need as a fundamental element for
achieving sustainable and lasting peace. To that end,
our country has been implementing policies throughout
the national territory aimed at bringing the presence of
State institutions where they have been lacking.

The establishment of security in all corners of the
country was essential, accompanied by institutional
strengthening and the establishment and implementation
of multiple programmes with a gender focus to meet
the specific needs of the women and children who
were Victims of the conflict. Concrete examples of
that commitment at the highest level in our country are
the national public policy for gender equality and our
comprehensive plan to ensure that women can live free
from violence, enacted in 2013, along with the public
policy guidelines on risk prevention, protection and
the guarantee of the rights of women victims of armed
conflict.

However, those examples of the legislation that
we have developed and the policies that we have
implemented do not speak as tangibly to the impact on
the people as their own stories, such as that of Cielo
Fernandez, a woman from a rural area on the Colombian
Atlantic coast called Tierralta, where her husband,
Oscar Dario Hurtado, was murdered by a paramilitary
squad in 2007. The violence took the lives of a great
many other people as well that year, and Cielo simply
could not run away. Her daughter Ariana needed her.
Cielo, for example, says "I do everything for my love
of Ariana." "Everything" meant not leaving her land.

Cielo was linked to the national plan for assistance
and comprehensive reparation to victims. She received
compensation, which contributed to her acquiring decent
housing, including support from the Victims United
programme to finish her studies as an administrative
assistant and get a better job. For her, reparation is not
the money itself, but what can be recovered with it. I
quote Cielo:

"For example, it allowed me to dream of having a
home and to study and get ahead, and through my
example of overcoming challenges, to encourage
my daughter to see that this is good. Before that,
it was clear that nothing happened for the victims,
and now the Government is present. People are not
so helpless, and that allows one to see the world
from another perspective."

To arrive at a consistent and comprehensive
undertaking, such as that just mentioned, Colombia has
developed and put in place tools to make it possible to
find solutions to those kinds of problems and have an
impact on cultural transformation, which is needed so
as to change paradigms in which the use of force against
women and girls is accepted. Only in that way will we
be able to achieve success and reconciliation and create
new opportunities to build a new peaceful country. All
this has been confirmed by the most recent stage of the
peace negotiations in Havana, which we hope will soon
reach a conclusion.

In their various roles in times of crisis, women have
demonstrated courage as drivers of the reconstruction of
the social fabric and of forgiveness and reconciliation,
and have played an important role in achieving economic
and political inclusion. When one sees courageous
women who have the unlimited and committed support
of the Government, as in my country, the democracy
existing in States is strengthened and it sends a clear
signal that it is possible, in the darkest night, to find
effective solutions.

Allow me to conclude by referring to the way in
which my Government has managed to understand,
after many attempts to achieve peace, that peace is also
built by healing society, allowing ourselves to mourn
after all the barbarity of more than five decades of
conflict. To do that, the Government has been working
in rural areas especially affected by such phenomena,
seeking to help victims overcome the fear, mistrust and
traumatic experiences that they have suffered as a result
of the atrocities of the conflict, as well as to strengthen
their capacity to demand their rights and their active
participation in local democratic institutions, based on
the conviction that it is necessary to transform society,
disarm people's minds and heal the wounds of our
national soul.

