Mrs. Kavun (Ukraine): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Viet Nam for
organizing this open meeting and giving the Council
and Member States an opportunity to have a broad
exchange of views on such an important issue: the
empowerment of women for sustainable peace and
security.

We would also like to commend the determined
efforts of the Security Council members aimed at
finding effective ways to protect women and to ensure
their full participation in endeavours to maintain peace
and security. In this regard, we express our support for
Security Council resolution 1888 (2009), adopted last
month under the presidency of the United States.

Ukraine fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union, and, in line with the
Union, considers gender equality, gender

mainstreaming and the empowerment of women not
only as important objectives, but also as the means to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals and an
essential part of the development agenda.

Ukraine, as a non-permanent member of the
Council back in 2000, was one of 15 countries that
voted in favour of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). This decision of the Council, no doubt, was and
is the milestone document on empowerment of women.
We welcome the most recent report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of that resolution
(S/2009/465) and support its recommendations. At the
same time, my country shares concerns expressed by
the Secretary-General regarding the lack of
implementation of the resolution.

The question before us today is a complex one. In
response to the increased targeting of women and other
civilians that has become a shameful instrument of
contemporary warfare, the international community has
done a lot, but much still remains to be done. The
Security Council has adopted several resolutions on the
protection of children and civilians in armed conflict,
wherein it urged all parties to take special measures to
protect women and girls from rape and other forms of
sexual violence.

However, in spite of all international efforts,
women continue to be the most vulnerable victims of
armed conflict, targeted for the most brutal forms of
sexual violence. In addition to that, women also
experience the trauma of losing relatives and friends in
times of armed conflict and of having to take
responsibility for the care of surviving family
members. They also constitute the majority of refugees
and displaced persons.
My country is greatly concerned about this
situation and strongly condemns the targeting of
women and girls in situations of armed conflict. In this
regard, we welcome the Security Council's efforts to
pay a special attention to the particular needs of
women affected by armed conflict when considering
action aimed at promoting peace and security.

It is important that the Secretary-General's
reports to the Council dealing with specific conflict
situations and developments in the field also
incorporate gender perspectives in addressing various
aspects of conflict analysis and conflict resolution. It is
also important to be sure that personnel involved in
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations have appropriate training on the protection,
rights and particular needs of women. Security Council
resolutions setting up or extending peacekeeping
operations should provide a clear mandate to address
the protection of women and girls affected by conflict
against all sexual violence, abduction, enforced
prostitution, trafficking and threats imposed by
military, paramilitary and other groups.

We believe that the Security Council has a special
responsibility to support women's participation in
peace processes by ensuring appropriate gender
balance in United Nations peacekeeping missions. We
welcome the fact that the Council has already
recognized the important role of women in conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding and has
emphasized the importance of promoting an active and
visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective in
all policies and programmes when addressing armed or
other conflicts.

The presence of women in United Nations
missions can foster confidence and trust among the
local population, which are critical elements in any
peacekeeping mission. In performing their tasks,
women are perceived to be compassionate, unwilling to
opt for force over reconciliation and ready to listen and
learn, and they are widely seen as contributors to an
environment of stability and morality that fosters the
progress of peace.

At the same time, women are still
underrepresented in decision-making with regard to
conflict. Their initiatives and visions for peace and
security are rarely heard during peace negotiations. In
this regard, I would like to stress that women should
not be viewed primarily as victims of armed conflict;
the international community should use the potential of
women as agents of preventive diplomacy,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Being an active participant in United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, Ukraine has for years been
contributing women civilian police and military
observers to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We reiterate our readiness to continue working
constructively with other Members States in order to
ensure the protection of women in armed conflicts and
women's participation in peace processes.
