Mr. Mikec (Croatia): We thank the Indian
presidency for holding this debate on the specific role
of women's civil society organizations in conflict
prevention and conflict resolution and recovery - the
first on this particular issue.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.

The issue of the overall empowerment of women
has a special place in both the internal and external
policy of the Government of Croatia. We deem the
role of women's civil society organizations to be an
indispensable part of those policies. A perception of
women as victims often obscures their significant role
in conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding
processes, as well as the significant role ofwomen's civil
society organizations worldwide. The implementation
of our national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security is therefore one of our priorities.

With regard to enhancing the specific role of
women's civil society organizations in situations of
armed conflict and peacebuilding, I would like to
underline that legislative, judicial and public awareness-
raising measures are part of the synergy of the process.
In our experience, one of the best ways to bring into
focus the specific role of women in the area of peace
and security is certainly by strengthening relevant
legislative measures and institutional frameworks,
particularly in the judiciary and education, together
with gender mainstreaming efforts and gender training
programmes within State administrative bodies.

However, the existence of laws does not guarantee
their exercise in practice, in particular in traditionally
conservative societies and cultures. Therefore, the
closer cooperation of State bodies with broad layers of
society and the more intensive involvement of men in all
gender equality promotion activities remain essential.
Finally, all such efforts can succeed only with the full
and honest cooperation of Government bodies with
women's civil society organizations, which is crucial to
increasing and improving public awareness.

Moreover, empowered women's civil society
organizations not only play an important external
observer role in State measures, but also can direct State
actions according to the real needs of women citizens.
It is therefore essential to encourage and support
Governments and civil society organizations to work
jointly to create targeted campaigns, seminars, forums
and workshops aimed at raising public awareness and
knowledge of the importance of the greater participation
of women in all activities and decision-making
processes related to peace and security.

In our view, an indispensable part of the whole
process is the development of focused and concrete
regional cooperation. An example from our own region
of South-East Europe is the Regional Women's Lobby
for Peace, Security and Justice in Southeast Europe,
established in 2006, which has grown into a respected,
internationally recognized, strong lobby group for
women. The Lobby is a real-life example of women
contributing to their own empowerment and inclusion
in peace and security matters and decision-making
processes. It is fully supported by Croatia's and other
States' highest officials.

The honest commitment of Governments to women's
civil society organizations is essential, particularly in
the context of armed conflict, post-conflict situations,
transition periods and the withdrawal of United Nations
missions. There must be a commitment to giving proper
attention to gender equality issues, with appropriate
levels of security and protection and sufficient funding.
All such measures involving coordinated efforts of
State bodies and women's civil society organizations
should also contribute to a safer environment for
women's human rights defenders and activists.

Our common efforts in enabling women and
women's civil society organizations to participate in all
activities of conflict prevention, peace processes and
rebuilding societies is ofthe utmost importance, as their
role is vital in fostering sustainable peace and stability.
Croatia has stood and stands ready to engage actively
with relevant women's civil society organizations and
their respective Governments to share with them our
positive experiences and practices in conflict, post-
conflict and transition, in support of our joint efforts.

