Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
welcomes the initiative of organizing this meeting,
which has afforded us an opportunity to hear a briefing
by the Secretary-General on allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by United Nations
staff members. It follows the publication of his report
(A/70/729) of 16 February 2016 on the special measures
for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report, which has enabled us to better understand
the scale and reality of this scourge.

In addition to harming the image and credibility of
the Organization, these acts unfortunately overshadow
the praiseworthy efforts and the heroic work
accomplished by tens of thousands of soldiers for peace,
sometimes at the cost of their lives. That is why Senegal
reiterates its commitment to the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy and expresses its deep concern
with regard to the increase in the number of new cases
of allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, which
rose from 80 in 2014 to 99 in 2015. Furthermore, my
delegation deplores the fact that the percentage of
allegations that concern sexual acts against minors or
non-consensual sexual relations with adults has again
increased, rising from 35 per cent in 2014 to 55 per cent
in 2015.
This extremely unfortunate situation, which the
Secretary-General has just described to us, makes
all the more necessary our unceasing bold efforts to
prevent and punish sexual exploitation and abuse of
vulnerable populations by individuals mandated to
protect them. It goes without saying that the troop-
and police-contributing countries have the primary
responsibility of investigating allegations against their
uniformed personnel and, if necessary, of initiating
criminal proceedings and informing the United Nations
in a timely way of the progress and results of those
investigations.

Faced with this scourge, we must bolster our action
by giving pride of place to a constructive, preventive,
responsible and decisive approach. We must also bring
those responsible for cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse to justice. However, with regard to the measures
we adopt, we will have to ensure that innocent
individuals do not fall victim to collective punishment
for the crimes of individuals, even as we ensure the
respect of the dignity and rights of the victims.

Senegal, as a significant troop- and
police-contributing country, would like to reiterate its
commitment to take all the necessary measures to fully
assume the responsibilities incumbent upon it in this
area. This commitment reflects the ideal that underpins
our work in the field of peacekeeping, one of the key
principles of which is clearly underscored in the 2016
plan of action of the Chief of Staff of the Senegalese
armed forces, elaborated in the framework of training
military personnel in the rights and protection of
children:

"The Senegalese armed forces, both within and
outside our borders, have the duty notbe perpetrators
of abuse. Rather, they must be the protectors of
vulnerable groups: women and children."

In that regard, I am pleased to recall that for Senegal
the protection of civilians in the theatres of deployment
of our troops constitutes the very essence of their
presence. That is why the Senegalese armed forces are
resolutely committed to incorporating the law of armed
conflict into their training, planning and conducting
of operations. The objective is to enable the men and
women engaged in peacekeeping operations on the
ground at all levels to better understand and especially
to ensure respect for their obligations in the area of
international humanitarian law and human rights.

To that end, Senegal, thanks to its continued
cooperation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the non-governmental organization
Save the Children, has been able to organize
several seminars and training sessions, including
on international humanitarian law and respect for
children's rights. We have also established, at the
level of the Chief of Staff of the Army, a committee
on the rights and protection of children, which is
responsible for the implementation and coordination
of training activities for military forces on the law
and the protection of children before, during and after
conflicts. In that regard, strict disciplinary measures
have been stipulated for the perpetrators of violations
of international humanitarian law, particularly in cases
of violence, abuse or rape. Such measures include, inter
alia, imprisonment, repatriation, discharge from the
army or the gendarmerie, and trial before civilian or
military tribunals. That underscores the importance
my country attaches to the training and appropriate
predeployment preparation of our troops.

I therefore call on our bilateral, regional and
multilateral partners to accompany and support troop-
contributing countries in their efforts to prevent sexual
violations and abuse, particularly in terms of training
and predeployment preparation.

In conclusion, I wish to distinctly reaffirm that
Senegal, mindful of respect for human rights and the
protection of civilians in times of conflict, remains
determined to ensure that its army, which is well known
for its professionalism and republican character, strictly
upholds those principles in its theatres of operation.

