Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Allow me to begin by
congratulating France on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of June, and by
expressing my delegation's full confidence in your able
stewardship, Sir. This is already evidenced on the second
day of France's presidency through the convening of
an open debate on conflict-related sexual violence,
with a focus on the human trafficking dimensions. We
commend this French initiative and the useful concept
note guiding our discussions today (S/2016/496, annex).

I also wish to commend the Egyptian delegation for
its successful presidency last month.

My delegation expresses its appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his remarks, and
reiterates our firm support for United Nations efforts
to combat sexual violence in conflict. I also wish to
acknowledge the commitment, depth of expertise and
testimonies shared by the panel of briefers: the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Zainab Bangura; the Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, Maria Grazia Giammarinaro; and
Ms. Lisa Davis in their statements.

Malaysia welcomes the adoption on 16 December
2015 of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25, which
recognized the impact ofhuman trafficking in situations
of armed conflict, particularly on vulnerable groups
such as women and children. It was an important step
towards mobilizing coordinated and sustained actions
to address human trafficking as a threat to international
peace and security. Today's open debate further reveals
the alarming and pervasive link between human
trafficking and the perpetration of conflict-related
sexual violence. Evidently, the mass displacement of
populations due to armed conflict has exacerbated the
vulnerabilities of women and girls, increasing their
susceptibility to being preyed upon by unscrupulous
actors for sex trafficking.

We continue to witness the horrific impact of
sexual violence being used not only as an abhorrent
tactic of war, but also as a despicable tactic of terror by
non-State armed groups, including through abductions,
forced marriages, sexual slavery and the trafficking of
women and girls. These horrifying trends in conflict-
related sexual violence demand renewed attention and
innovative responses from the international community,
which we hope will be extensively explored during this
discussion, to which we offer the following contribution.

This year's report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361) presents
further disturbing evidence of the premeditated,
systematic and strategic use of sexual violence targeting
women and girls by terrorists and violent extremist
groups. Sexual violence against women and girls is a
shockingly common reality in conflict zones. In their
world of enslavement, they are used to lure and recruit
combatants with the promise of wives and sex slaves
to extract ransom from communities or as a means to
obtain funds through sex trafficking. The blatant and
outrageous exploitation of women and girls to fuel
the activities of terrorist groups calls on us to expend
existing strategies in counter-terrorism, including to
curb the financial flows to terrorist groups arising
from conflict-related sexual Violence. We believe that
this issue should be given greater focus at the fifth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy this month.

While the conceptual debate around terrorism
and violent extremism remains ongoing, we would be
remiss to overlook the crucial role that women can and
do play in the prevention and mitigation of these twin
phenomena. In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, emphasizing
the protection, participation and empowerment of
women as central considerations in strategies to counter
terrorism and violent extremism.

In addressing cross-border crime, such as
trafficking, the cooperation of regional bodies and
Member States is imperative, particularly where
trafficking routes span conflict zones and conflict-
related sexual violence is involved. In support of
such concerted action to prevent and combat human
trafficking, the States members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (SEAN) signed the ASEAN
Convention against Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, in Kuala Lumpur in November
2015, with a View to promoting intra-regional
cooperation, including in the investigation and
prosecution of perpetrators, the sharing of information,
and capacity-building.

My delegation is fully aware of the challenges
faced in combating human trafficking, as noted by the
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children. Malaysia remains committed to
addressing this scourge. More importantly, we have
taken and continue to take measures to improve our
response, which is based on a comprehensive approach
involving a wide range of partners and stakeholders. For
instance, the Government of Malaysia directly supports
the work of 75 non-governmental organizations
working to support victims of human trafficking in the
country by providing essential services such as legal,
medical and logistic assistance. At the enforcement
level, we maintain strong links and cooperation
between ASEANAPOL and INTERPOL to disrupt,
degrade and dismantle regional and international
trafficking networks.

The rescue, recovery and reintegration of women,
children and men affected by conflict-related sexual
violence must lie at the heart of our actions. Survivors of
sexual violence often suffer twice over - first from the
heinous acts themselves and then from the subsequent
stigman ofbeing victims. The stigmatization can last for
generations, particularly for children born to victims of
sexual violence, who are sometimes unjustly abandoned
or shunned by their communities. This undeserved
stigmatization must be countered by promoting greater
compassion, understanding and awareness from the
grass roots to the highest political level. We strongly
encourage the engagement of civil society, community
and religious leaders in reversing negative perceptions
of survivors of sexual violence, especially children
born to victims of sexual violence, who have often been
overlooked in reintegration efforts.

In addition, we support the provision of timely and
comprehensive assistance and health-care services for
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence to aid their
recovery and reintegration into their communities.
Furthermore, we encourage donors to channel consistent
funding to reintegration programmes that empower
women and girls, especially livelihood programmes
and education opportunities.
As we mark the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict later this
month, Malaysia joins the international community
in pledging its solidarity with all the survivors and
victims of sexual violence in conflict. Their dignity
and determination in overcoming immense suffering
provide powerful testimony and serve as a reminder for
us to redouble our efforts to eradicate sexual violence in
conflict. I wish to conclude by taking this opportunity to
commend the tenacious work of Special Representative
Bangura and her Office, as well as the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
and United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict in providing analysis and catalysing responses
in this field. We assure them of our continued support
for their work. I also share Ms. Bangura's concluding
remarks when she says thatjustice may be delayed, but
it will not be denied.

