Mr. Fachinotti (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks Germany for its leadership in
pursuing and stepping up the fight against sexual
violence in conflict within the context of this open
debate and next year's twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). In particular, we
express our gratitude to this morning's briefers for their
outstanding efforts in this area.

Switzerland welcomes the German initiative of
introducing resolution 2467 (2019), a new resolution on
sexual violence in conflict, which aims to strengthen
monitoring and accountability mechanisms while
identifying a survivor-centred approach. Switzerland
is concerned, however, about the weakening of agreed
language on key issues.

Switzerland reaffirms the primary responsibility of
States Members to protect men, women and children
from sexual violence and rape. Any response must
address as a priority the needs and rights of survivors,
the prevention of violations and abuse and the
accountability of the perpetrators of such crimes. Three
aspects are of particular importance to us.

First, sexual violence is not only a feature of
contemporary conflicts; it is also foreshadows them.
The higher the rate of sexual violence is in a given
society, the more likely it is that violence will be
used in conflict situations. Gender inequality and
discrimination are at the heart of sexual violence.
Combating that scourge therefore requires the inclusion
and empowerment of women, the protection of women
human rights defenders and the willingness of men to
create a climate of mutual trust and respect.

Secondly, it is important to acknowledge that,
while women and girls are the main targets of sexual
Violence in conflict, men and boys are also victims of
those terrible acts of violence, but the subject remains
taboo. Cases of violence against men and boys are
rarely reported, as those who have been subjected to
such acts are even more fearful of being stigmatized
and excluded. Given such gender stereotypes as
"a man can be only a hero, but never a victim", it is
difficult if not impossible to break the cycle of silence
and revictimization.

We therefore advocate a holistic approach to caring
for the victims of sexual violence, including children
born as the result of rape. We must ensure that any
response focuses on the rights and needs ofall survivors,
including their sexual and reproductive health rights
and that they are treated with dignity and respect. Any
response must encompass medical and psychosocial
services, while at the same time facilitating and
strengthening the reintegration of survivors into their
communities and social structures.

Thirdly, Switzerland is concerned about the
impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of sexual Violence
in national and international conflicts. In particular, we
support the efforts of the International Criminal Court
and its Prosecutor to ensure that the perpetrators of
sexual and gender-related crimes are held accountable
for their actions.

