Mr. El Nour: I am pleased to take the floor on behalf
of the International Organization for Migration (IOM).
I would like to start by thanking Spain and the Security
Council for convening this ministerial open debate on
the topic "Trafficking in persons in conflict situations".
The international community has increasingly focused
on the topic of human trafficking in the past decade.
However, the crime of human trafficking, which results
in horrendous human rights violations, remains largely
overlooked in emergency situations.

In my brief intervention, I would like to address
the question of how we can work together to confront
human trafficking in conflicts, how to better implement
robust victim identification mechanisms and how
humanitarian action can effectively support the victims
of human trafficking. Research on that topic has
consistently found evidence that emergency situations
exacerbate pre-existing risks to human trafficking and
create additional ones that are specific to the crisis
setting. Human trafficking in conflict situations is
often a consequence of the erosion of the rule of law,
the desperation of individuals following the disruption
of economic activities, or the potential intrusion by
criminal networks into refugee camps and camps for
internally displaced persons.

We need to collectively understand that counter-
trafficking efforts in emergencies are a matter of life
and death. Employing counter-trafficking measures
in crises settings helps to prevent individuals from
falling victim to highly exploitative practices that can
seriously impair their physical or psychological well-
being and potentially endanger their lives. In that
regard, the International Organization for Migration,
in close cooperation with its humanitarian partners,
has consistently been working on the issue of human
trafficking and exploitation in crisis settings, and
has already operationalized its response through
the integration of the protection and assistance of
crisis-affected trafficking victims into humanitarian
responses as lifesaving measures.

IOM. has further made extensive use of its
Displacement Tracking Matrix tool to assess the
exposure to trafficking along migratory routes and
to measure the risk to trafficking faced by actual
and potential victims in camps and crisis-affected
communities. The International Organization for
Migration strongly supports the Council's efforts to
eliminate human trafficking in conflict situations
and hopes that the Council will take into account
the humanitarian dimension of crisis-induced
human trafficking.

In closing, I want to say that I welcome the adoption
of Security Council 2331 (2016) today, and we stand
ready to support the Council in that regard.

