Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Allow me first to
express my thanks to you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate. Armenia fully supports the Security
Council's recognition of the need to take effective
measures to address conflict-related sexual violence.
We welcome the recent report (S/2012/33) of the
Secretary-General. My delegation also welcomes the
presentation of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Margot Wallstrom, and we
commend her tireless efforts and leadership. We are
also grateful for the informative statements made by
the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and by Ms. Megheirbi.

Today's debate addresses an urgent matter. More
and more, we are witnessing a disturbing trend in the
use of sexual violence as a political and military tool,
the effects of which are grave and long-lasting, often
alienating entire communities. Although conflict-
related sexual violence is not a women's issue, it is a
known fact that a disproportionate number of victims
of such violence are women and girls. Sexual violence
affects all aspects of women's lives, compromising
their well-being, security and basic human rights. It
further exacerbates the inequities that women face and,
in so doing, it threatens peace, security, development
and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts. As such,
addressing sexual violence demands a multilayered
approach and requires involvement on the
international, regional and national levels. We must
identify the crime and bring those responsible to
justice.

During the past decade, particular attention has
been paid to addressing some of the specific crimes
experienced by women and girls during armed
conflicts, namely, rape, trafficking, enforced
prostitution and enslavement. It is critical to ensure
accountability for past and present crimes, and to not
grant immunity to perpetrators. Otherwise, we would
be providing amnesty for future crimes. In that regard,
Armenia is encouraged by the report of the Secretary-
General, which for the first time includes an annex that
lists the parties credibly suspected of committing or

being responsible for patterns of rape and other forms
of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict on
the Council's agenda. Such reporting and systematic
data collection are critical, because crimes of sexual
violence remain underreported due to stigmatization
and fear of reprisals. We hope that such measures will
promote accountability and that they will provide
timely and reliable analyses based on which the
Security Council can carry out its responsibility to
protect civilians from conflict-related sexual violence.
We cannot address sexual violence, however, by simply
naming and punishing offenders. More fundamental
changes are needed on institutional and societal levels
as well.

This week we will commemorate the tragic
events that took place in Sumgait, where civilians were
killed and horrendously sexually violated just because
they were Armenian. However, the focus of today's
debate is conflict-related sexual violence in situations
on the Council's agenda. It is our firm belief that the
effectiveness of the work of the Council and its
members arises in large part from its ability to focus on
the agenda. It is unfortunate, then, that one
representative used this debate, as inappropriate as this
may be, as a forum to voice accusatory grievances with
regard to the killing of civilians in Khojaly. As we
tackle the important issue of conflict-related sexual
violence, we must remain accurate, reliable and, most
importantly, focused on the objective at hand in order
to enhance protection and achieve effective results.

In conclusion, although important steps have
been taken towards our common goal of preventing and
effectively responding to conflict-related sexual
violence, much remains to be done. Armenia remains
committed to working closely with the Council, the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the other relevant United Nations bodies
toward this noble end.

