Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting and to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his statement. I also appreciate the briefings by
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, and the non-governmental organization
representatives.

This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption ofresolution 1325 (2000), the first and historic
resolution to recognize the role of gender equality and
women's leadership in international peace and security.
Japan, as a peace-loving nation, has consistently
supported conflict resolution and peacebuilding and
maintains the perspective of gender equality in its basic
principles of official development assistance.

Two years ago, the Prime Minister of Japan,
Mr, Shinzo Abe, showed our country's firm determination
to realize "a society in which women shine" (A/68/PV12, p. 34) by announcing the contribution of over $3 billion
to developing countries over the following three years.
The women and peace and security agenda is one of the
pillars for realizing that commitment. Japan has been
steadily implementing that pledge and will achieve the
goal announced by Prime Minister Abe before the end
of this year.

Japan finalized its national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000) last month. It has ambitiously set itself 150
goals, which will be regularly monitored. One of the
unique features of the plan is its inclusion and emphasis
on gender mainstreaming during all phases of natural
disaster risk-reduction and response. Today, Japan has
the honour to promise to fulfil those commitments.

The world has changed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). The nature of conflicts has
changed accordingly. Today, I would like to point out
three challenges surrounding the women and peace and
security agenda and demonstrate Japan's commitment
to addressing those issues.

First, violent extremism has emerged as a new
challenge. Women are its primary victims. At the same
time, they can, by succumbing to the influence of
extremism, become perpetrators. Addressing the root
causes of violent extremism is critical. But how do we
do that?

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/716) and
the global study point out, the economic empowerment
and participation of women play a key role in resolving
conflicts effectively, sustaining peace, and preventing
violent extremism from happening in the first place. Let
me offer an example. In cooperation with UN-Women,
Japan has been supporting the refugees and internally
displaced persons in Syria, Iraq, Jordan, Egypt and
Lebanon through vocational training and cash-for-work
programmes. We believe that women's engagement in
peace and security, along with their empowerment and
protection, will serve as a bulwark against the spread
of extremist ideologies. From that standpoint, Japan
continues to respond to the current refugee crisis and
will furnish approximately $810 million in assistance
this year to refugees and internally displaced persons
from Syria and Iraq.

Securing project implementation is our second key
challenge. In order to sustain project implementation,
it is essential to broaden the donor base, including
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and
individuals. In that context, Japan supports the aims of
the Global Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace
and Security and Humanitarian Action.

Thirdly, we must not tolerate impunity for security-
related personnel who perpetrate acts of violence
against women. In countries experiencing conflict
situations, it is urgent to engage the national military
forces, police and judiciary sectors with the women
and peace and security agenda. Capacity enhancement
for those sectors is key. The international community
should mobilize every possible means for supporting
that objective. Japan will increase its assistance to the
office ost. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which is making tremendous efforts in that regard.

Japan welcomes the increasing momentum of the
women and peace and security agenda. Today's adoption
of resolution 2242 (2015) under the strong leadership
of the Spanish presidency marks a historical step.
We also welcome the completion of the global study.
Continued effort is needed, however, on the part of all
actors of the international community to implement
its recommendations. Japan is one of the co-chairs of
the group of friends of the global study. Japan will
take over the role of chair of the Group of Seven next
year. Through those roles, Japan will vigorously push
forward the women and peace and security agenda
during the coming year and beyond. Now is the time
for us all to move forward.

