Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Ijoin others, Madam
President, in thanking you for organizing this open
debate on women and peace and security - Displaced
women and girls: leaders and survivors, on the occasion
of the fourteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
The choice of that specific topic is a demonstration
of your continued commitment to the protection
and promotion of women and girls in conflicts and
post-conflict situations. I also thank Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women,
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Chaloka Beyani,
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons, and Ms. Suaad Allami of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for
their insightful remarks.

The importance that Rwanda attaches to this
debate derives from our own experience, as many
Rwandans were deprived of the right to live in their
country for around 35 years, owing to exclusion and bad
governance. Rwandans lived for many years in refugee
camps in neighbouring countries, and many witnessed
how women and girls were particularly vulnerable.
Fortunately, our efforts to restore the country after the
1994 genocide against the Tutsis has paid off, and from
1994 to 2013 over 3.4 million Rwandan refugees, a
majority of whom were women and girls, returned home
and were successfully reintegrated into the society. On
30 June 2013, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) invoked the cessation clause
for Rwandan refugees. Following that decision,
Rwanda continued to mobilize and facilitate the return
of the remaining 100,000 refugees, as per UNHCR
statistics. In that respect, we have continued to work
with UNHCR to accelerate the full implementation of
the cessation clause, so that all Rwandans can enjoy the
right to their country.

At the same time, we are concerned at the fate
of women, men and children that are still being held
as hostages and used as human shields by the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) for
the past 20 years. We hope that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will ensure that they return home, as more than 10,000
already have done since 2001, in accordance with
resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147 (2014).

As the concept note (S/2014/731, annex) that you
have prepared for this debate recalls, Madam President,
the current numbers of refugees, asylum seekers and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) have never been
higher since the Second World War - more than
50 million by the end of 2013, many more since 2014,
with 32,000 forcibly displaced people daily, half of
them women and girls. It is clear, as the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg reminded us, that
the situation of forced displacement exacerbates the
existing vulnerability of women and girls, since they,
more than anyone else, are exposed to sexual and
gender-based violence, to trafficking and enslavement,
to exclusion based on historical and cultural traditions,
and they have specific health needs. Furthermore, many
women who have lost their husbands in conflicts face
social and economic challenges, as a number of them
are uneducated and they must take responsibility for
their households.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in
October 2000, however, there has been notable progress
in the advancement of the agenda of women and peace
and security, which has become one of the priorities of
the Council, as demonstrated by country-specific and
thematic resolutions that we have been adopting since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Member States,
including my own, are also at the forefront of that issue,
as many of them have adopted national action plans to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), and have endorsed
a declaration of commitment to end sexual violence in
conflict.

As for the African Union, our continental
organization, as recalled by the representative of
Nigeria, it adopted a landmark document in 2009,
the African Union Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa,
known as the Kampala Convention, which Rwanda
has ratified. The Convention imposes a number of
obligations on States parties related to general and
specific protection of women and girls, including
protection against sexual and gender-based violence,
and to reproductive and sexual health. Given that
background, we can say that the world is equipped with
a comprehensive legal and normative framework for the
effective protection of women and girls, including in
the case of forced displacement.

Despite local, national, regional and global
efforts to protect women refugees and IDPs, there is
still a gap between the framework and its effective
implementation. The theme you proposed for this
debate, Madam President, invites us to discuss the issue
of"Displaced women and girls: leaders and survivors".
Those two notions - leaders and survivors - are
complementary, as both protection and promotion are
indispensable for an effective implementation of our
policies. Indeed, the protection of women and girls,
in case of forced displacement, requires our resolve,
as we must effectively protect them from sexual and
gender-based violence in refugee and IDP camps, and
ensure that those who are sexually-abused benefit from
medical services, including health and psychological
care.

One of the practical steps to achieve that goal includes
the increased deployment of women peacekeepers. That
will, of course, be possible with the increased training
and recruitment of women into national armies and
police. It will also require a greater commitment on the
part of Member States to appoint women peacekeepers,
including in leadership positions, as well as women
protection advisors. Another practical measure for the
protection of women, as suggested by Mr. Beyani, is to
prevent women from venturing outside refugee and IDP
camps to collect firewood for cooking. In that regard,
Rwandan peacekeepers in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur brought improved
energy-saving cooking stoves to Darfur, which were
introduced in Rwanda in 2000 in order to preserve
trees. We believe that those cooking stoves are critical,
not only to protect the environment, but also to protect
women refugees and IDPs. However, no protection
measures will be effective if they are not accompanied
by our collective resolve to hold the perpetrators of
sexual violence and other mass atrocities accountable.

Furthermore, the protection of women refugees
and IDPs must go hand in hand with the promotion
of their empowerment. That requires our collective
efforts to promote the education of girls, and I take
this opportunity, as Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka did earlier, to
pay tribute to Malala Yousafzai, who was awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize this month.

Women's empowerment should also be reflected
not only in the Council but also in other leading
positions, such as the Government and Parliament.
Indeed, that measure would not only reflect the actual
representativity of women in our societies but also
enable them to ensure the mainstreaming of gender
issues in our laws, including those related to economic,
human rights and humanitarian issues.

As the representative of the United Kingdom
said - and I thank him for introducing presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/21, just adopted - the best
protection of women internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees is to ensure that they do not
become refugees and IDPs in the first place. As Rwanda
has always said, the Security Council needs to shift its
attention from the day-to-day management of conflicts
and their consequences to their prevention, including by
addressing their root causes.

Let me conclude by noting that 2015 will be the
year of a triple review: the peacekeeping review, the
peacebuilding review and the high-level review of
resolution 1325 (2000). We hope that all those reviews
will be complementary and lead to a better protection
and promotion of women's rights, especially in conflict
and post-conflict situations. Our country is ready to
share its experience and to further contribute to a world
where women and girls are not only protected but also
empowered to become the leaders that they deserve to
be.
