Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your country, Peru, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. We also thank you, Sir, for convening this
thematic debate.

We thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, for her briefing on the Secretary-General's
recent report (S/2018/250) on conflict-related sexual
violence. We also commend Ms. Pramila Patten, the
Secretary-General's Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her insightful briefing.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the African Union.

Allow me to begin by reaffirming the importance
that Botswana attaches to the protection and promotion
of the rights of women and children and its commitment
to addressing all forms of violence against women,
including support for preventing sexual violence
in conflict.

Sexual violence in armed conflict represents
one of the most serious forms of violation or abuse
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Ending violations of women's
human rights is therefore a moral imperative, and
one that we must collectively address. That heinous
crime is especially rampant in armed conflict and
is used as a tactic of war and terrorism. As a result,
its prevention and eradication amounts to upholding
universal human rights and maintaining international
security. Furthermore, preventing sexual violence is
part of conflict prevention and sustaining peace. In that
regard, we welcome efforts by the Security Council and
the General Assembly to build on the existing zero-
tolerance policy and improve the system-wide approach
to preventing and responding to sexual exploitation
and abuse.

I reaffirm my delegation's continued support for
women's empowerment and gender mainstreaming in
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), As SDG 5 rightly acknowledges, women
and girls from anywhere in the world deserve equal
rights and opportunities to live free of violence and all
forms of discrimination. We also agree that achieving
gender equality and women's empowerment is essential
to achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth and sustainable development.
We recognize in today's world the urgent need to
undertake concrete measures to combat intolerance,
negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination,
incitement to violence and violence against persons
based on their gender, identity, religion or belief. In
this regard, we commend the United Nations system
for making an invaluable contribution to and playing
an important role in addressing these challenges at the
global, regional and national levels and in assisting
Member States in their efforts to eliminate and prevent
all forms of violence against women and children. To
that end, I wish to express the support and appreciation
of my delegation for the good work of UN-Women and
the effective implementation of the mandates of the
Secretary-General's Special Representatives on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and Children and Armed Conflict.

While also recognizing the existing normative
framework established under resolutions 1261 (1999),
1325 (2000), 2272 (2016) and other subsequent
resolutions dealing with women, peace and security and
children and armed conflict, Botswana shares the belief
that efforts to address sexual violence in conflict should
be consistent with and complementary to the United
Nations wider efforts. In this regard, we underscore the
need for greater coordination and collaboration with
all relevant stakeholders to strengthen global efforts
in addressing sexual violence. In this connection, we
welcome the Secretary-General's launch in 2017 of
the Plan of Action for Religious Leaders and Actors
to Prevent Incitement to Violence that Could Lead
to Atrocity Crimes. We recognize the key role that
religious leaders have in influencing mass followers,
and thus their vital role in using their moral authority
to support specific strategies to prevent incitement to
violence in conflicts.

We remain convinced that more needs be done to
address these ongoing atrocities, and my delegation
also wishes to emphasize the responsibility of States
to comply with their relevant obligations to end
impunity and effectively use all available means to
enforce accountability by prosecuting all perpetrators
of such crimes.

In our quest for the empowerment of women in
peace and security, we believe that efforts must be
intensified in promoting women's active and equal
participation in conflict prevention, conflict resolution,
transitionaljustice and security sector reform processes.
In that regard, we strongly support the involvement
of women in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention.
Regarding women's access to justice, we call on
all States to take practical steps to address obstacles
to women's access to justice, including by creating an
enabling environment in which women can easily report
incidents of violence without fear or intimidation.
Furthermore, we urge all States to strengthen the
capacity of their national criminal justice systems in
order to serve victims fairly and with dignity.

In conclusion, Botswana pledges to work with the
international community in developing strategies for
preventing Violence against women and children in
conflict situations. We remain optimistic that, given
our collective will and commitment, especially in the
Security Council, we can bring an end to these shameful
crimes against humanity.

