Mr. Waxman (Israel): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this important meeting. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Michelle
Bachelet and Alain Le Roy; Mr. Hamidon Ali,
President of the Economic and Social Council; and
Ms. Thelma Awori for their presentations, and to
recognize the presence of many ministers and
Government officials who have travelled great
distances to this meeting. The statement made from
afar by the Secretary-General is testament to his
commitment to this issue.

The Council's adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
10 years ago was a watershed event in the protection of
women and girls in conflict. The international
community was and should remain proud of this
accomplishment. The resolution helped to galvanize
Member States' resolve to tackle this issue. In recent
years, the Council has adopted several additional
resolutions also focused on the intersection of gender
and conflict - namely, resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009) - and the United Nations has
issued a number of reports and studies on the issue.
Now, the inclusion of a gender-based perspective is
becoming commonplace in peacekeeping missions and
their mandates, peacebuilding efforts, and United
Nations country teams. In this regard, efforts to
increase the number of women in missions' senior
leadership and deployed as mission personnel are
notable.

However, recent events, such as the violations
that took place in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Guinea, starkly highlight the wide gap
that remains between the noble aspirations and the
level of protection some women receive on the ground.

Israel welcomes the development this year of
indicators for progress in implementing resolution
1325 (2000). The wide-ranging measurements are the
most significant step forward to date in our attempt to
determine where the international community and
States have been successful, and where we fall short. If
these indicators are to be truly useful, however, the
information they generate must be used to address
shortcomings in a concerted and candid manner in
order to ensure that the goals of the resolution are met.

The United Nations has a number of effective
tools at its disposal to help push forward this objective.
The Security Council, for example, could designate
consistent leadership within the Council on this issue
and consider methods to maintain its engagement in a
more comprehensive manner. In addition, the
Secretary-General could, in appropriate situations,
make greater use of the team of experts to deploy to
areas of concern, as allowed for in resolution 1888
(2009). These experts could assist States in
strengthening the rule of law, including building
judicial capacity and security sector reform. Such
efforts would go a long way towards achieving justice
for victims and discouraging future abuse.

To ensure the meaningful inclusion of women in
peacemaking processes and post-conflict
reconstruction, some societies will have to experience
a seismic shift in gender attitudes on the ground.
Although resolution 1325 (2000) and its related
resolutions concern gender-based violence and the
transition to a post-conflict society, these issues are
inextricably linked to the situation of women's rights
as a whole. States that ignore this simple fact may be
disappointed with the long-term results of their efforts.
But if States accept this reality and strive to address it,
they are likely to enhance their stability and even
economic recovery in the aftermath of conflict.

Member States bear a large part of the
responsibility for implementing the provisions of 1325
(2000). In the spirit of the resolution, Israel has
amended its Women's Equal Rights Law to mandate
the inclusion of women in any group appointed to
peacebuilding negotiations or working towards conflict
resolution. Israel also seeks to assist other countries in
their implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Through its international cooperation agency,
MASHAV, my Government organizes programmes in
women's leadership and capacity-building for women's
non-governmental organizations. We believe that the
skills learned in these programmes can make a real
difference on the ground in post-conflict recovery.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is a milestone on the long
road to the protection of women in conflict. We should
collectively renew our commitment to its provisions.
Israel, for its part, rededicates itself to ensuring that it
upholds this landmark achievement at home, and
stands ready to join hands with any nation, anywhere,
to help realize this goal.

