Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): At the outset, let me thank
Bolivia for organizing this open debate on this very
important issue. We also thank the briefers for their
insightful remarks.

Ending conflicts, forging peace, alleviating human
suffering, addressing injustice, protecting human rights
and placing the world on a safer path are at the heart of
our work here at the United Nations, whose seventy-
third anniversary we marked only yesterday. While
considerable progress has been made at the normative
level on several counts, conflicts and violence are in
fact on the rise. According to the Secretary General's
report (S/2018/900), more countries are experiencing
some form of violent conflict than at any time in
the past 30 years. Conflicts are also becoming ever-
more complex and protracted. Delayed and weak
responses - often dictated by big-Power rivalry
and expedient policies - are perpetuating human
suffering. In all that turmoil, instability and chaos,
women, especially young girls, continue to suffer
disproportionate and lasting consequences. In many
conflict zones, they remain soft targets, often exploited
by aggressors with impunity as a war tactic to humiliate
and terrorize civilians.

The Security Council's landmark resolution
1325 (2000) was a watershed moment that rightfully
brought women's issues to the centre of the global
conflict prevention debate and in the larger context
of international peace and security. Women across
the world, as other speakers acknowledged earlier,
have emerged as leaders and consensus-builders,
inspiring hopes of peace and prosperity amid conflict
and violence. Over the years, the women and peace
and security agenda has become a powerful vehicle
to ensure the feminization of peace in a post-conflict
environment. Yet - and here is the paradox - women
remain largely invisible to and excluded from peace
processes and negotiations.

The women and peace and security agenda, at its
core, is an attempt to bring new perspectives to conflict
resolution. It focuses on the root causes and drivers of
conflicts and shines a much-needed light on the most
oppressed and marginalized. By focusing on creating
an enabling environment for the more meaningful
participation of women, it also aims to bring them to
the table as true stakeholders, able to define and protect
their interests. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
briefly five specific points.

First, the Security Council must play its primary
role of maintaining peace and security by focusing on
the root causes of conflicts, especially on the protracted
disputes on its agenda, like Jammu and Kashmir and
Palestine, where women suffer disproportionately from
the violence caused by foreign occupation.

Secondly, the international community must ensure
that equal attention is given to all four pillars of the
women and peace and security agenda - prevention,
participation, protection and recovery - and that the
framework is implemented at all levels.

Thirdly, national human rights institutions are a
critical link in the chain of accountability for women's
rights violations, as well as their prevention. Efforts to
strengthen their work should be supported.

Fourthly, despite clear evidence to suggest that the
active participation of women during peace processes
significantly enhances the prospects for success,
women continue to remain on the sidelines of the peace
continuum. Women's special skills in mediation makes
them particularly suited as the Secretary-General's
Special Envoys and Special Representatives. Yet there
are few who head such missions. That clearly needs
to change.

Fifthly, to ensure the greater participation of
women in peacekeeping mandates, gender perspectives
need to be fully integrated into the peacebuilding
paradigm to reinforce the protection environment.
That would greatly enhance women's role in peace
accords, as well as in post-conflict stabilization and
reconstruction phases.

My country's own experience shows that giving
women a key role brings fresh perspectives and builds
a solid foundation for a vibrant society. We remain
determined to carry forward our ambitious domestic
agenda for women's empowerment and gender
mainstreaming, which my country's new Government
has made a top priority, and we will continue to engage
constructively with the international community in
that regard.

