Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the Guatemalan presidency for
proposing this discussion, as well as the Indian
presidency, which took it up again after Hurricane Sandy.
We would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for having presented the report (S/2012/732)
on the implementation of the strategic framework for
the promotion of women and peace and security. The
report shows, in our view, the usefulness of the global
indicators in measuring progress - or sometimes the
lack of progress - in a systematic, transparent, honest
and critical way.

Let me first address the main topic of today's open
debate, the inclusion of women's civil society networks
in the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts and
peacebuilding. I will concentrate on three main issues
that we believe to be crucial.

First, on mediation, the Secretary-General's
report provides us with important facts and figures.
Unfortunately, it comes to the conclusion that progress
remains limited with regard to the inclusion of women
in peace talks and the inclusion of women's issues in
peace agreements. Our challenge today is to identify
opportunities for their participation and to offer them
such opportunities at all levels. There is no shortage
of capable and well-trained women, as a number of
mediation training events for women and women's
networks have taken place all over the world.

In the framework of our programme dedicated to
dealing with the past, we have attached great importance
to a gender-sensitive implementation of the transitional
justice mechanisms. Women's perspectives and needs
must be an essential component of all four principles of
the fight against impunity: the search for truth, justice,
reparations and guarantees of non-recurrence.

On security sector reform, gender-based violence
can be rooted in traditional values and norms,
stereotypes and structures that are transmitted through
education and perpetuated by civil society. These
stereotypes, values and norms are mirrored in the
security sector, which is also one of the key areas to
focus on in the fight against discrimination and gender-
based violence. If the security sector is to be effective
in fighting impunity for crimes committed against
women, it must be reformed, taking into account sexist
cliches and patterns of deep-rooted discrimination
against women, and by including women's networks in
the process.

Allow me to conclude with a quick advertisement.
The NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security has prepared a report parallel to the work of
the Security Council entitled "Mapping Women, Peace
and Security in the UN Security Council: 2011-2012".
We recently launched the report with Liechtenstein,
and we warmly encourage all Council members and the
entire United Nations membership to read it and to take
into account its recommendations in their daily work.

Finally, I have the pleasure today to announce the
launch of another important publication supported
by Switzerland and Liechtenstein, the Handbook on
Women, Peace and Security, by the NGO Women's
International League for Peace and Freedom. It is the
second edition of the Handbook and examines the
degree to which the Security Council has incorporated
women, peace and security into its geographical work
over the past 12 years, specifically in the Council's
country-specific resolutions. The Handbook also
contains important recommendations and is available
electronically as a smartphone application so that all
can have access at any point to language involving
women, peace and security. We encourage all Council
members to use the Handbook to better strengthen the
links between geographical and thematic work.

IfI may, I would like to distribute a copy of the
Handbook to each member of the Council. I know it
is lunchtime and I would very much have preferred to
provide members with more material sustenance, but I
do hope that this intellectual nourishment will also be
ofinterest to the Council.

