Mr. Mansour (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would first like to take this opportunity to convey to
Ms. Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of State of the United
States, my sincere congratulations on her country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to thank her for having taken the
initiative to organize this debate on a topic that is as
important as it is topical and which calls for a response
from the entire international community.

I also welcome the participation of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Srgjan Kerim, President of
the General Assembly, and many ministers this
morning. The active and involved participation in this
debate of so many delegations of Member States

08-3908]
reflects the primary interest that we all attach to issues
of peace and security and to the central role of women
in achieving this and in achieving the ideals of our
universal organization. But it also highlights the role
that we must play in order to promote women's rights
in general and to protect and provide care for the
victims of the horrors and brutalities of conflict in
particular.

While it is understood today that the international
community must make greater efforts to promote the
status and rights of women and to take appropriate
action in that context, even more so must we protect
them during times of conflict. Violence against women
is, by definition, a dehumanizing and unacceptable
practice and an abject violation of basic human rights.
Such practices must be fought and forcefully punished.

The efforts made to that end by the United
Nations and its Member States can only be praised and
encouraged. However, reports issued by the United
Nations and its specialized agencies give us alarming
statistics on the treatment of women and on their
sufferings and call upon us to redouble our efforts to
put an end, once and for all, to the violence and abuses
committed against women. We should recall, in this
context, that at the 2005 World Summit our heads of
State or Government reaffirmed the importance of
protecting civilians, particularly women, in conflict
and post-conflict situations. They also emphasized the
need to promote women's rights as an essential
precondition for peace, security and development
worldwide.

The international community possesses an
impressive legal arsenal for eliminating all forms of
discrimination against women and for protecting them
as a vital force in every society. It is thus up to us to
ensure rigorous implementation of the provisions of the
relevant international legal documents and instruments,
and to ensure that women in our societies, particularly
those affected by war and conflict, finally benefit from
the protection and attention that they deserve in order
to bring about lasting peace and stability in our world.

Today's debate makes it incumbent upon us to
make a collective commitment to ensure that women,
wherever they are, are no longer vulnerable, are no
longer placed in an inferior position and are no longer
exposed to discrimination, threats or terror. In this
framework, our civilizations must choose to genuinely
participate in the global move towards ensuring that
women get the place and role that they deserve in
today's societies as full-fledged citizens, partners
benefiting from equal opportunities and holders of
responsibilities in all sectors and at all levels. This is,
of course, a blueprint for a civilized society where
women are a guarantee of modernity, a vehicle for
development, a guarantor of political stability, and
especially a preventive security shield against any
obscurantist and retrograde tendencies - in other
words, the spearhead of a society mobilized for
progress and prosperity.

That, in any case, was the path taken in
promoting the status of women in Tunisia, launched
immediately after Tunisia achieved its independence in
1956, with the adoption of a personal status code. This
is one of the basic pillars of the new plan for our
society that is being undertaken by independent Tunisia
thanks in large part to the reformist revival brought to
our country by President Ben Ali. The principle of
gender equality under the law was thereby enshrined
and women were given a position at the forefront of
the social and political modernization of the country.
This has secured the position of Tunisian women in
political life, making them an essential component of
society and an effective, genuine agent of progress and
stability.

