Mr. Eide (Norway): I have the honour to address
the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway.

Security threats against women are often dismissed
as belonging to the private sphere or are written off
as cultural issues. But let us be clear, conflict-related
sexual violence can constitute a war crime, a crime
against humanity, and, in the most extreme cases, an
act of genocide. We must respond with the same sense
of urgency as we do to other threats against peace
and security. We must recognize the need for the
participation of both women and men in preventing and
solving conflict and, not least, in building sustainable
peace.

The report before us (S/2013/l49) is a catalogue
of violence, rape, atrocities and torture. The Nordic
countries welcome the comprehensive approach it
takes, covering both protracted crises and emerging
concerns. Its attention to sexual violence against men
and boys, the practice of forced marriage and the plight
of children born as a result of wartime rape is valid
and timely. The Nordic countries commend the work
of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, and particularly
welcome her efforts to foster national leadership, build
capacity and hold Governments accountable. During
conflict it is national Governments that have the main
responsibility to protect civilians, whether from more
conventional methods of warfare or from conflict-
related sexual violence. All too often they fail to do so.

One glaring example is Syria, where the
Government continues to demonstrate its utter failure to
protect its own citizens. The use of sexual violence and
rape by warring parties in Syria has been reported by
the independent international commission of inquiry,
as well as by numerous human rights organizations. As
thousands of civilians flee from war-torn Syria every
day, the world is watching in horror as history repeats
itself.

As long as the permanent members of the Security
Council remain divided, gross human rights violations
are allowed to continue with impunity. In his report,
the Secretary-General makes a number of important
recommendations to the Security Council on combating
impunity. In that connection, the Nordic countries urge
Council members, first, to include the women and
peace and security agenda in all the relevant Council
resolutions and mandates and to put the issue on the
agenda of visits to missions.

Secondly, we must ensure that the resolutions on
women and peace and security are not only part of
Security Council's debates but also have real impact on
the ground and that commitments are followed up.

Thirdly, we call on the Security Council to continue
to combat impunity for crimes of sexual violence and
to use its unique power to increase the pressure through
targeted sanctions against perpetrators of sexual
violence.

The Nordic countries warmly welcome the
Secretary-General's call for emergency contraception
and safe abortion to be included in the responses and
services to survivors. The agreed conclusions of the
Commission on the Status of Women also call for the
provision of such life-saving services. Girls and women
who have been raped during war should not be forced
to continue unwanted pregnancies. For some victims
of rape, undergoing a dangerous abortion is the only
alternative to a life of shame, isolation and hardship, or
even honour killings.

The rehabilitation of victims will not be possible
unless they have access to comprehensive services.
That includes access to health, justice and reparations.
As long as survivors have little or nothing to gain from
reporting sexual violence and coming forward, under-
reporting will continue and impunity will prevail.
Sexual violence, including threats of sexual violence,
can have far-reaching effects, not only for those affected
and their families but also for the wider communities
and future prospects for peace and reconciliation.

Sustainable peace cannot be achieved without
inclusive processes in which women's agency and
contributions are fully recognized. We strongly
commend the tireless work of civil society organizations
in continuing to advance women's participation and
bringing their voices from the ground to the fore
of international peace and security. Promoting and
supporting the broad women and peace and security
agenda is a priority for the Nordic Governments. It is
part of our joint efforts to foster gender equality and
international peace and security. We are convinced that
the two are closely linked.

