Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Chilean presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
protection challenges and needs faced by women and
girls in armed conflict and post-conflict settings. I also
thank Ms. Helen Durham, Director for International
Law and Policy at the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Ms. Ilwad Elman of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security for the relevance
of their respective briefings.

Women and girls are often deprived of protection
and support during armed conflicts. They bear the
brunt of the devastating consequences of conflicts
because of their significant vulnerability and their
substandard living conditions. They endure all the
afflictions of armed conflicts: hostage takings,
captivity, torture, rapes, forced marriages, summary
executions, arbitrary detentions, forced displacements,
threats and intimidation. Girls in particular are subject
to the increasingly widespread practice of kidnapping,
and both women and girls are used as human shields
near weapons stockpiles or barracks and suffer from
the direct or indirect effects of hostilities, such as
bombings, famines and epidemics.
Rape is often the most widespread form of violence,
in particular in refugee camps and camps for displaced
persons. Unfortunately, women and girls are often not
provided with any security in such situations owing to
the militarization of certain camps, the proliferation of
light weapons and the infiltration of armed elements
into refugee populations. We are all called upon to
act, and efforts by the international community in this
regard must be coordinated.

Morocco strenuously condemns such barbarous,
brutal and inhumane practices, especially since
their serious consequences further complicate the
establishment of lasting peace and reconciliation.
Gender-based violence, the threat of such acts or
incitement to commit them constitute a serious violation
of international humanitarian law, in particular the
Geneva Conventions and international human rights
law.

This year is the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). That resolution
recognizes the contribution of women to peace and
security at the national and international levels and
encourages their participation in all aspects of conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Since
2000, six other resolutions have been adopted by the
Council on this subject, thereby strengthening the
normative architecture aimed at protecting the rights of
women during and after conflict. Morocco welcomes
the efforts of Member States to implement those
resolutions at the national level, the growing number
of action plans that have been signed or that are in the
process of being negotiated on the protection of women
and girls, and the efforts undertaken by UN-Women
and UNICEF.

However, we must recognize that the progress
achieved to date in terms ofthe effective implementation
of those resolutions remains very limited. The slow
pace of progress in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the impunity that continues to be
enjoyed by those who have committed acts of sexual
violence promote a very unsafe environment for women
and girls.

Women are unfortunately underrepresented at all
stages ofpeace processes. There are many obstacles that
prevent their participation in the prevention, mediation
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding.
Very few women are able to effectively participate in
public life in the period following conflict because of
violence, intimidation, insecurity, lack of rule of law,
cultural discrimination, the rise of sexist extremism
and fanaticism and socioeconomic factors, including
poverty and lack of education. Morocco believes
that women's marginalization threatens to delay or
undermine the establishment of lasting peace, security
and reconciliation.

The protection of women and girls from all kinds of
violence in conflict periods and the realization of their
fundamental rights during and after conflicts remains
a collective responsibility that requires determined,
coordinated and joint efforts with a view to enhancing
the measures that can be taken to restrain those who
commit and order violent acts to be committed against
women and to prevent the recurrence of such crimes.
Firm measures should be taken on an urgent basis to
promote accountability for all those who continue
act in defiance of international law and the norms of
protection for women and children. Morocco recalls,
in that regard, the obligations of the States parties
to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and its Optional
Protocol and the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocols, and recalls the commitments
laid out in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and all the resolutions dealing with the issue of
women in armed conflict.

In conclusion, allow me to highlight the following
points. Morocco believes that women should participate
fully, effectively and on an equal footing in all the stages
of peace processes, given the crucial role they play in
preventing and settling conflicts and in peacebuilding.
Morocco highlights the key role of women in repairing
the social fabric of countries emerging from conflict
and stresses that they must be included in the drafting
and implementation of post-conflict strategies so
that their needs are taken into account. It is crucial
to strengthen women's empowerment, which can
contribute to effective peacebuilding following
conflicts. It is important that women be appointed in
sufficient numbers to decision-making positions and as
high-level mediators and members of mediation teams.
In addition, national strategies for women and girls'
protection remain dependent on measures taken to
strengthen Government's capacities and the availability
of material, financial and human resources ensuring
their definitive status, emancipation and independence.
Therefore, it is important that there be a prompt and
generous response to the call by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2014/693) inviting donors to provide
the funds necessary for the implementation of plans of
action and national programmes.

