Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we would like to thank Angela
King, Noeleen Heyzer, and Jean-Marie Guehenno for
the information and observations they provided to us at
our meeting today. We have found the information
extremely useful for this debate.

Combating all forms of discrimination and
violence against women, the situation of women in
armed conflict and their involvement and participation
in peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction are
increasingly included on the agenda of the most
important universal and regional international forums.
These issues are also discussed by the major bodies of
the United Nations. The Security Council is no
exception to this trend. On 31 October 2000, it adopted
resolution 1325 (2000).

Despite the attention focused on these issues and
acknowledgement of their existence, we have to say
that considerable effort is still required in order to
overcome their negative consequences. Unfortunately,
many recommendations exist only on paper, and others
are not fully implemented yet.

In this connection, we place great hopes in the
inter-agency study now being prepared. The documents
before us suggest that this research will contain
specific practical recommendations, including with
regard to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). This includes improving the protection of
women and girls during conflicts, increasing their
participation in peace-building, and ensuring that
gender issues are taken into account in various aspects
of peacekeeping operations, and so forth.

It is important here to avoid overly generalized,
cliched conclusions and recommendations. Drafting
comprehensive approaches should not be detrimental to
the solution of specific issues or problems in any given
situation. If we talk about what can be done by the
United Nations, we would like to express our support
for the idea of establishing a senior gender adviser in
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We
believe that the work of such a person would improve
coordination on relevant issues during the
peacekeeping activities of the United Nations.

At the same time, we cannot forget that measures
adopted by the United Nations alone are insufficient.
What is needed is that real account be taken of the
specific needs of women and girls during conflict
situations and that they actually participate in all
phases of prevention and settlement, in addition to
post-conflict peace-building. A significant contribution
to solving all of these problems can be provided by
civil society, including non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), many of which have quite a lot of experience
in this whole range of gender issues.

Here it would be advisable to involve not only
well-known NGOs but also local women's
organizations. This point was well made by Ms. Angela
King in her statement. Nobody would dispute the fact
that it is the vulnerable sectors of the population, such
as children, women, older people, the disabled,
refugees and internally displaced persons, that suffer
most during crises and conflicts. But it often happens
that women and girls themselves act as combatants and
are active participants in hostilities. That is why
excluding them from the whole process of negotiations
and peace settlement, or in the establishment of post-
conflict power structures, can become a kind of slow
ticking bomb that could trigger further crises.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our belief
that women can play an important role in conflict
prevention and settlement, and in peace-building. To do
that, it is necessary to ensure that they are full
participants in measures taken for the maintenance and
consolidation of international peace and security, and
to ensure strengthening their role in decision-making
with respect to conflict prevention and settlement.

