Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the opportunity to participate
in this open debate of the Security Council on the
contribution of women to international peace and
security. We acknowledge the visionary work of the
Council and its members, aimed at enhancing the
principles of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
empowerment of women. We are pleased with the new
gender entity, UN Women, under the leadership of a
distinguished stateswoman, Michelle Bachelet. The
Secretary-General has also shown an excellent example
in incorporating women into the upper management of
the Organization, and I reiterate our commitment to
cooperation and support for all.

For reasons that have been extensively studied
and debated through the ages, women and children
have always been the vast majority of the innocent
victims of violence and armed conflict. The irony
remains that these victims, the most vulnerable and
most affected, emerge from their precarious condition
of fragility to provide great consolation in times of
anguish, to be healers of suffering and to help mitigate
the torments caused by ruthless violence in all its
manifestations.

Due to the very nature of their being, women,
from birth, learn to be peacemakers and negotiators in
conflicts. This is the task that they carry out entirely
naturally within the bosom of their families, and by
virtue of their innate abilities as catalysts of
agreements in the intimacy of their homes and in the
most complex situations. We have seen them acting as
mediators in hostilities, as bridges to overcome
differences and as intermediaries in serious disputes.

Women listen with their feelings. Through the
healing of the heart and the balm of emotion, they can
reach the soul to cure wounds, where medicine
stumbles and science fails. Sometimes relief comes
more from soothing the affliction than from treatment
of an actual physical injury, just as a mother puts her
child to sleep with the mellifluous whisper of her voice
and the soft caresses of her love, women soothe pain
with only the breath of their serene words and their
tranquil presence.

There is no doubt that in armed conflict valiant,
exceptional and extraordinary attitudes produce heroes.
But just as there are heroic acts forged in the heat of
battle, there are also those forged in the battle for life,
in times of peace, exemplary conduct that contributes
to peace. Undoubtedly to those heroic feats of war we
can attach well-known names, like medals for honour
and bravery, but there are also many names of those
unknown people who perform epic deeds in peacetime,
which, owing solely to their numbers, remain shrouded
in the deepest silence.

I come from one of those small nations, as the
poet has said, where our history could be written in a
teardrop, and I can vouch for this second type of
heroism. For example, those self-sacrificing mothers in
my homeland, bearing the cross of poverty on their
shoulders, with no companionship other than their
solitude and the burden of their responsibilities,
support and educate their children, so that they can
achieve their impossible dreams. They are heroines of
peace. There are those dedicated women who, defying
prejudice and defeating the inertia of inequality,
climbed the mountain peak. They are heroines of
peace.

When, in Central America, where I come from,
we passed through the bloody polarization of the
19805, the women who enlisted in any of these civilian
trenches to aid the destitute, to care for refugees or take
part in the reconstruction of their homeland were,
unquestionably, heroines of peace. When, in my
country, we suffered the impact of a brutal natural
disaster that shattered the geography of our country
into hundreds of pieces, like a jigsaw puzzle, all of
those compatriots and those women who came from
other parts of the world as members of volunteer
missions, to help in that moment of misfortune, to
repair lives, to breathe encouragement to the grief-
stricken - they were all heroines of peace.

The immigrants who, desperate and hopeless,
leave their beloved homeland, risking everything, even
their lives, to reach a destination that offers a way to
provide for their kin - and who, ironically, with their
remittances, help sustain the sickly economy of the
country from which they fled - they are heroines of
peace. There is no greater contribution than acts of
solidarity, large and small, that brighten the darkness,
that make coexistence easier and lighten the heavy
burden of life. That woman, who is real, who exists
everywhere, and whom we do not see, because we have
become accustomed to her silent, daily, constant and
untiring presence; that stranger who, without
monument or tribute, builds peace every day, because
the cry of suffering, the agony of tribulation, has
neither nationality nor borders.

I close with the deepest recognition of every
heroic act, but with a feeling of great admiration for all
the heroes and heroines ofpeace.

