Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): I wish to thank
Spain for convening this open debate on trafficking in
persons in conflict situations. I also thank the briefers
for their informative presentations.

I share the messages of sympathy expressed in the
Chamber today for the victims of the terrorist attacks in
Berlin and Ankara.

In the interests of time, I will read an abridged
version of the Philippine statement. The complete text
will be circulated in due course.

The problem of trafficking in persons in conflict
situations is multifaceted as it cuts into other equally
pressing issues, such as migration, counter-terrorism,
gender-based violence, money-laundering, poverty
alleviation and the protection of children. It therefore
requires a multifaceted response that seeks to understand
the problem from a political, socioeconomic and even
cultural perspective, and brings together Governments,
civil society and the private sector on both the domestic
and international fronts.

The Philippines considers trafficking in persons,
including in conflict situations, to be a core national
concern. Allow me to share some initiatives that we
have undertaken in that area:

First, the Philippines has made the protection of
Filipino migrants one of its foreign policy pillars. We
endeavour to protect our migrant workers from human
trafficking and exploitation by utilizing a victim-
centred and human rights-based approach. Recently,
we have worked with the United States of America and
other partners on the Migrants in Countries in Crisis
initiative to improve responses for migrants in countries
experiencing conflict or natural disaster.

Second, a solid legal framework, coupled with
strong institutions capable of implementing the
relevant regulations, is also essential. The Philippines
National Strategic Action Plan Against Trafficking in
Persons uses a migrant-centred approach to the entire

migration cycle - from pre-employment, transit and
on-site employment to return migration and eventual
reintegration - which has resulted in successful

prosecutions of perpetrators of human trafficking.

Third, adopting a one-country team and
multi-stakeholder approach that consolidates the
mandates, efforts, resources and interests of the duty-
bearers and stakeholders to come up with a robust
response, has proven to be effective. It has resulted in
the mainstreaming of interventions down to the grass-
roots level and in promoting awareness.

Fourth, in the context of counter-terrorism, it
is important to examining trafficking corridors and
the business flow of trafficking. That has enabled
the Philippines to strategically locate victims and
traffickers in the entire process, especially at critical
points of intervention where victims are the most
visible and can be rescued; to identify critical points
in the business flow to deal the strongest blow to the
operations of trafficking syndicates; and to expose
and develop strategies to block new means employed
by traffickers.

Fifth, in the socioeconomic context and as a
prevention measure against violent extremism,
poverty alleviation programmes targeting conflict-
torn areas should integrate trafficking in persons as
an indicator and ensure access to economic services
and opportunities, making the victims less vulnerable
to trafficking.

Sixth, armed conflict, unstable peace and other
situations increase the vulnerabilities of children
and youth to recruitment into civilian armed groups
and rebel groups. Government efforts are focused on
preventing the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
vigorously investigating allegations, holding the
perpetrators accountable and training front-line officers
on appropriate methods to assist children apprehended
from armed groups.

Seventh, to mitigate the vulnerabilities of women
and children in conflict situations to sexual violence
and trafficking, the Philippines has instituted a gender-
based violence cluster composed of law enforcers
and social welfare service providers that specialize
in gender issues. The clusters facilitate access to
protective information, psychosocial and trauma-
informed care, protective custody, and rehabilitation
and reintegration through social programmes, such as
education, employment and enterprise.

One challenge today is the lack of accurate data
to measure the extent of trafficking in persons in
conflict situations. We welcome the recommendations
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/949) on the
development of a data-collection system, whereby
Member States can benefit from an international
structure that integrates and shares intelligence,
studies and mechanisms that would help identify,
quantify and assess the prevalence of trafficking in
persons in conflict areas, and provide expert advice and
technical assistance in the formulation, implementation
and validation of programmes, such as the National
Action Plan, so that national initiatives are responsive
and effective.

