Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Madame President, for
convening an open debate on this important issue. My
appreciation also goes to Ms. Margot Wallstrom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, for her comprehensive and
informative presentation of the Secretary-General's
report on this issue (S/2010/604).

As the Secretary-General's report states, over the
past year, there has been much progress at the policy
level on the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 1888 (2009). In particular, we would like to
commend the measures that it outlines to improve the
collection of information on sexual violence that would
lead to better monitoring, deeper analysis and more
systematic reporting.

Despite that progress, the impact of resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) has yet to be fully
realized on the ground. Women and children continue
to suffer disproportionately in areas of armed conflict.
The use of sexual violence and brutality as weapons of
war still prevails. The horrifying mass rapes that
occurred in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in August were a stark reminder of how
much remains to be done.

We must redouble our efforts to combat sexual
violence in conflict. In that regard, the Republic of
Korea supports the strong leadership of the Security
Council and welcomes the package of measures that
the Secretary-General suggests to accelerate the full
implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009). Among others, my delegation would like to
highlight the following three points.

First, it is essential to grasp the reality of sexual
violence committed in armed conflict through reliable,
timely and objective information, as well as to ensure
that, in turn, perpetrators are identified and brought to
justice. In that respect, we strongly support the
Secretary-General's call for the Security Council to
mandate that the Secretary-General's annual reports list
those parties that have engaged in patterns of sexual
violence in armed conflict. We believe that this
measure would contribute to halting impunity by
providing a basis for more focused approaches and
targeted measures towards those parties.

Secondly, preventing and responding to sexual
violence require a more coherent and coordinated
approach within the United Nations system. For
example, a more integrated strategic framework
between peacekeeping missions and United Nations
country teams should be established to formulate
mission objectives targeted at women and peace and
security, as well as to evaluate their implementation.
We hope that UN Women, which will come into
operation in January 2011, will play a leading role in
coordinating various activities related to the work on
women and peace and security among United Nations
entities.

Thirdly, we need to increase the participation of
women in peace processes and to strengthen their
capacity. The full participation of women, particularly
local women, in such efforts is essential to creating
inclusive and sustainable peace. Research conducted
by the United Nations Development Fund for Women

demonstrates that, since 1992, women have, on
average, made up less than 8 per cent of the
participants in official delegations to peace processes.
Where women have participated in peace negotiations,
the resulting peace agreements are more likely to
reflect women's experiences of conflict and to contain
elements of judicial, economic, social and political
remedies for the abuses that they have suffered.

On its part, the Republic of Korea has been active
in implementing resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) by mainstreaming a gender-sensitive approach
in all its policies and activities and by increasing
women's participation at all levels. In that regard, we
recently deployed a gender adviser as a member of an
Afghanistan provincial reconstruction team. We will
remain committed to the complete and successful
implementation of the resolutions.

Finally, I would like to conclude by expressing
my sincere hope that today's open debate will guide us
further by resulting in a clearer direction and concrete
measures that will advance our noble endeavours for
women and peace and security.

