Mrs. Bailey: First and foremost, the African
Union (AU) wishes to congratulate the President on his
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, as well as to thank him for
convening this open debate on the theme "Women
and peace and security: implementing the common
agenda" as we celebrate the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his insightful and comprehensive report (S/2016/822)
and to commend the Executive Director of UN-Women
and the Executive Director of EVE Organization for
Women Development, South Sudan, for their valuable
contributions to today's open debate.

In the same context as this debate, last Thursday
the African Union Commission held its annual open
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council on the status of women and children in
conflict, under the theme "the role of the media in
enhancing accountability on women, peace and security
commitments in Africa".

On the margins of the twenty-seventh African

Union Summit, held in Kigali in July, the African
Union launched the first report on the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda in Africa.
That was primarily the result of consultative meetings
with AU States members and regional economic
communities that have developed national action plans
for the implementation ofresolution 1325 (2000). So far,
19 countries and two regional economic communities
in Africa have developed action plans.

Further to that report, the Commission embarked
upon a continental results framework that will facilitate
monitoring and reporting on the women and peace and
security agenda item on a regular basis. Throughout
the consultations conducted by the Special Envoy
of the African Union Chairperson on women, peace
and security, Her Excellency Ms. Bineta Diop, with
AU member States, women's groups, partner United
Nations agencies and other development partners,
there was consensus that instruments do exist but that
delivery on commitments is lacking.

Sixteen years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), in an endeavour to consolidate and accelerate
the gains made by the continent in the participation of
women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, the
African Union Commission is undertaking a number of
activities guided by aspiration 6 of Agenda 2063, which
stipulates, inter alia, that Africa will be a continent
where women are empowered and play their rightful
role in all spheres of life. One of the critical spheres
is the area of peace and security as a sine qua non in
Africa's stability and development. The undertakings
include the following.

The first entails establishing a network of African
women mediators to contribute to the search for a
peaceful resolution of conflicts on the continent and to
support communities in their peacebuilding efforts.

The second area of focus deals with changing
the narratives on women to recognize their role in
peacebuilding, through mobilization of a network of
journalists, reporters and bloggers who are committed
to reporting in a gender-responsive manner on issues
of women and peace and security - not just by telling
stories of Victimization but also those of women's
leadership and of women as positive agents for social
change and economic transformation.

The third effort involves mobilizing and supporting
member States and regional economic communities
to develop action plans on the women and peace and
security agenda. The Republic of Namibia and the
Southern African Development Community region are
presently undergoing the process, with the support of
the Office of the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission.
The fourth area entails launching a network of
centres of excellence in various regions of the continent
to work on women and peace and security issues,
with a View to sustainable and broad strengthening of
women's capacities in peacebuilding, thus ensuring the
availability of women's expertise in that area.

The fifth action pertains to training military
personnel on the rights of women, in line with the
AU zero-tolerance policy on sexual and gender-based
Violence. Countries like Senegal have already embarked
on such training.

It would be remiss of me not to take the opportunity
at this juncture to salute and appreciate the support of
dependable partners in assisting the African Union
Commission in carrying out those activities to sustain
the contribution of women in peace and security.
Without being exhaustive, I wish to mention the support
of UN-Women, the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa, the United Nations Development Programme
Regional Service Centre for Africa and the countries of
Norway, Spain, Germany and the United Kingdom for
their invaluable contributions.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the African Union
Commission's commitment and action towards the
advancement of the women and peace and security
agenda. An annual report will be submitted to the
African Union Peace and Security Council, and
subsequently shared with the United Nations Security
Council. For the African Union Commission, the Africa
we want is an Africa where all daughters and sons
of the continent are equal, enjoy the same rights and
obligations and participate equally in building a stable
and just society. Women must be fully part and parcel of
that endeavour and of Africa's transformative agenda.

