Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to thank India
for organizing today's important discussion and to
express special thanks to Ms. Bineta Diop for her
insightful briefing.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
welcomes the adoption of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2012/23) on 31 October. Slovenia views issues
related to the promotion of the rights of women as one
of the key priorities in the field of human rights.

We welcome this year's focus on the role of
women's civil society organizations in contributing to
the prevention and resolution of armed conflict and to
peacebuilding. We consider the role of women's civil
society organizations important in ensuring that the
needs and rights not just of women as citizens, but also
of members of all vulnerable groups, are taken into
account, since women are usually represented among
caregivers to the most vulnerable members of their
families, communities and societies.

I would like to also welcome the Secretary-
General's annual report on women and peace and
security (S/2012/732) and to express my country's
support for the recommendations contained therein on
more solid progress throughout the women and peace
and security agenda.

We fully support the need to ensure consistency
in the implementation of international norms and
standards on the human rights of women and girls
and in efforts to prevent and resolve conflict and
build peace. We commend the increased number of
explicit references to women, peace and security in
commitments made with respect to actions of the
Security Council, including specific instructions
included in mission mandates on promoting women's
rights, their protection and empowerment and support
for the development of civil society. We therefore
encourage the Council to consistently continue that
practice in order to ensure that all country-specific
and thematic decisions in terms of the establishment or
renewal of mission mandates include such provisions.

Let me highlight the importance of addressing
the challenges to women's and girls' participation and
representation. We welcome the increased number of
women on the roster of mediation experts and among
the Secretary-General's Special Representatives
and Deputy Representatives. We consider that in
some situations, women mediators or representatives
facilitate interactions with local women and civil
society organizations. We also consider that investing in
education for girls is of key importance to assure them
the prominent role they deserve in their communities
and societies in the future.

There are many persistent obstacles to
women's participation and representation in public
decision-making processes. An important one is
the lack of security. Sexual violence and other
forms of gender-based violence, as well as a lack of
accountability and, consequently, impunity for such
acts impede women from actively engaging in public
life and decision-making. It is therefore important to
ensure gender-responsiveness in transitional justice
mechanisms.

In conclusion, allow me please to shortly brief the
Council on the implementation of Slovenia's national
action plan to implement the resolutions on women and
peace and security adopted two years ago. Slovenia is
preparing its first report in accordance with the action
plan to review the progress on implementation since
its adoption. We have continued to contribute to the
implementation of resolutions on women and peace and
security in international and regional organizations at
various levels. During the period under consideration,
Slovenia actively contributed to promoting the
implementation of the resolutions in the Western
Balkans by contributing to the development of some of
the national action plans in the region.

As the promotion of gender equality and women's
rights in conflict and post-conflict situations has also
been high on Slovenia's foreign policy agenda, we have
strengthened efforts to promote women's rights in
general and in specific country situations, especially
in the framework of the United Nations Human Rights
Council and its various mechanisms, including the
universal periodic review.

The promotion and protection of the rights of
women and girls was raised also by Slovene high-
level representatives in various international forums.
Slovenia has made progress in training civilian and
military personnel to be deployed to international
operations and missions on issues regarding women,
peace and security. In the past two years, the
participation of policewomen in training programmes
of international missions increased immensely.

