Ms. Loj (Denmark): Let me first of all emphasize
that I find it most appropriate that the Council should
take stock of this important issue on a regular basis.

The last time we had sexual exploitation and
abuse on our agenda was during the Danish presidency
in May last year. Today, as in May, we have received
updates from Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno and the Secretary-General's Special Adviser,
Ambassador Zeid. I would like to thank both of them
for their very useful briefings, their views on the
present status of implementation and their thoughts on
how to move forward from here.

Denmark fully supports the statement to be
delivered shortly by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union.

The issue of sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeeping forces and other staff members of the
United Nations is one that we would all have preferred
to do without. It is completely unacceptable by all
moral and ethical standards, it undermines the
reputation of the United Nations, and it has devastating
consequences for the victims. Therefore, Denmark is
pleased that the United Nations has taken a number of
important steps to fight sexual exploitation and abuse.
The Secretary-General's report on women, peace
and security of October 2005 included a United
Nations system-wide action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We warmly
welcome the fact that one of the key areas of action
was response to sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations staff, related personnel and partners. In
order to secure an effective follow-up to resolution
1325 (2000), we - the United Nations and its Member
States - need to demonstrate firm action and
prosecute the perpetrators who violate not only our
trust, but the trust of those they were sent to help and
protect. The policy of zero tolerance has to be
implemented.

Denmark has already initiated a national study on
how to protect women and girls against, for example,
sexual exploitation and abuse throughout the planning
and completion of international operations. The study
will, among other things, ensure that the protection of
women and girls is reflected in all the basic documents
of any given operation and in the education of the
Danish armed forces.

It is of the utmost importance that a policy of
zero tolerance go hand in hand with the
implementation of awareness and accountability
programmes. Awareness-raising programmes should
focus on pre-mission training, training upon arrival in
the mission area, and training and awareness
throughout the deployment. Programmes on
accountability should target not only the individual
soldiers or staff, but also the management. All levels of
staff must realize that sexual exploitation and abuse
will not be tolerated and that misbehaviour will be
penalized.

If we succeed in that field and manage to change
the culture, the perception and the mentality to a point
at which sexual exploitation and abuse are no longer
accepted or tolerated at any level in the Organization,
there will be no need for investigation teams, no need
for victim assistance programmes and no more
embarrassing news about misbehaved United Nations
peacekeepers. That will happen only in a perfect world,
I admit. We are not there yet, but let us together try to
get as close as possible.

Allow me, in that connection, to mention that
Denmark has agreed to sponsor a train-the-trainer
workshop in Italy, organized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) under the rubric
"Capacity-building on the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations".

Denmark also supports the ongoing work in the
Working Group of the Special Committee for

Peacekeeping Operations, where a number of
recommendations proposed by, among others, Prince
Zeid and DPKO will be further discussed. Several of
those recommendations seem from the outset to be
straightforward, logical and obvious. We are, however,
well aware that in the attempt to implement the various
initiatives, many complex legal aspects have surfaced.
Legal obstacles, however, should not prevent us from
continuously striving to make progress. The fight
against sexual exploitation and abuse must continue.
Let me at this stage urge all troop- and police-
contributing countries to cooperate actively with
DPKO on that issue.

Likewise, I expect that the Secretariat shall not
hesitate to return to the Council and ask for further
guidance, if need be.

