Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for initiating
and convening this meeting. I also thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and Ms. Smythe for their
very informative briefings, which assist us greatly in
gaining a comprehensive understanding of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and of the
current and future challenges facing us. The
recommendations they set forth are also very
enlightening and deserve study by the Security
Council.

Three years ago, the Security Council discussed
the issue of women, peace and security for the first
time and adopted resolution 1325 (2000). That very
important resolution expresses great concern at the
immense harm caused to women by armed conflicts
and calls on the international community to adopt
measures to protect the rights and interests of women
in armed conflicts, to support their participation in the
conflict resolution process and to encourage them to
play an important role in peacekeeping operations.

The adoption of this resolution marked a historic
step taken by the international community in protecting
the rights and interests of women in armed conflicts
and in providing an active role for women in conflict
resolution. Today, it has already become a very
important guide for the international community in
carrying out related work and a very important
reference document for the Council with regard to
deploying peacekeeping missions.

Over the three years since the resolution's
adoption, the United Nations Secretariat, the relevant
peacekeeping missions, the Secretary-General's Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women
and the United Nations Development Fund for Women
have all worked long and hard to implement resolution
1325 (2000) and have achieved many positive results.
Today, in many conflict areas, protecting women's
rights and interests and enabling them to play a role in
conflict resolution has already become very important
work for peacekeeping operations. The Missions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Kosovo have
intensified their fight against the trafficking in women
and have adopted special measures to protect its
victims. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Sierra Leone, peacekeeping staff have improved their
capacities, through the training and sensitization
process, to protect women against violent attack and to
address the peacetime reintegration of women soldiers.
In Timor-Leste, women are playing an increasingly
important role in their country's reconstruction. Their
representation in the Government and Parliament is
already near 30 per cent. We welcome those positive
developments. We hope that the United Nations and the
relevant agencies can summarize those successful
experiences and apply them to other peacekeeping
operations.

In order to further implement resolution 1325
(2000), the international community still has much
work to do. In that regard, I should like to emphasize
the following three points.

First, the Security Council should intensify its
conflict prevention and resolution efforts to essentially
protect women from the harm of war while protecting
their rights and interests as much as possible.

Secondly, violent crimes against women must be
addressed within the framework of law, and the
Governments of the countries concerned are duty-
bound to seriously pursue such cases and bring the
criminals to justice. Parties to conflicts must comply
with international humanitarian law and adopt special
measures aimed at protecting women from violent
attack. In addition, we support the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy with regard to peacekeeping
personnel, and we call on troop-contributing countries
to improve the training and supervision of their
peacekeeping staffs that they truly comply with the
relevant provisions of the United Nations Code of
Conduct.

Thirdly, the role played by women in conflict
settlement cannot be neglected; in some conflict areas,
it has even become essential. Therefore, we support
participation by women in all phases of the peace
process. We hope that Security Council missions and
all parties concerned will undertake further efforts to
create conditions conducive to more extensive and in-
depth participation by women in that regard.

In conclusion, lasting peace cannot be realized
without participation by women. The Beijing
Declaration, adopted in 1995, says:

"Local, national, regional and global peace
is attainable and is inextricably linked with the
advancement of women, who are a fundamental
force for leadership, conflict resolution and the
promotion of lasting peace at all levels".

China has always attached importance to the protection
of women's rights and interests and to the advancement
of women. We shall continue to work together with the
international community for the genuine achievement
of the objectives set forth in resolution 1325 (2000).

