Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of October and assure you of my delegation's
full cooperation. I thank you for convening this
important debate, over which you are personally
presiding.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Susan
Rice and the United States delegation for their
excellent leadership during a very eventful and fruitful
month of September.

I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Asha-Rose Migiro for her statement, as well as to
welcome the statements made by the Secretary-
General's Special Adviser on Gender Issues,
Ms. Rachel Mayanja; the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), Ms. Ines Alberdi, and Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi
Amin, representing the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security.

Uganda is committed to strengthening women's
participation in the promotion of peace and security
within the context of conflict prevention and
resolution, eradicating sexual Violence and ending
impunity in conflict-prone situations. As Uganda is a
country that has experienced an extended period of
instability, the Government has set one of its priority
goals as tracking progress on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Women's participation in
Uganda's political life goes beyond elective office and
has been extended to other spheres, including
peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts, as stipulated
by resolution 1325 (2000).

Uganda has an advanced, articulate and organized
women's peace movement. Even before the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Uganda Government had
previously supported the efforts of women leaders,
such as Ms. Betty Bigombe, who initially led the peace
talks with the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) to end
the conflict in northern Uganda. The Uganda
Government also made provision for women's
participation in the 2006-2008 peace talks with the
Lord's Resistance Army in Juba, in the southern Sudan.
In addition to the two women directly on the peace
team, Uganda facilitated women's attendance at
various meetings that were held during that process.
In addition, during the talks a gender adviser was
seconded to the Office of the Special Envoy to LRA-
Affected Areas. This was the result of collaboration
between UNIFEM. and the United Nations Department
of Political Affairs. Uganda also ensured that close
reference was made to resolution 1325 (2000) in the
Implementation Protocols on reconciliation and
accountability; comprehensive solutions; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; and the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement that were signed by both parties,
as well as the Uganda Government's eventual peace
recovery development plan for northern Uganda, which
was launched in July 2009 to ensure that women
equally enjoy the opportunities and benefits of the
planned interventions.

Uganda is the first and only country in the world
to adopt a three-in-one national action plan on
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and the Goma
Declaration. Uganda is also one of five countries to
develop a national action plan with concrete indicators
to monitor implementation, as well as planning for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, so as to
take into consideration the needs of female and male
ex-combatants, as well as their dependants.

Uganda's action plan focuses on the relevant
legal and policy framework, improved access to health
facilities and medical treatment for victims of sexual
and gender-based violence, women in leadership and
decision-making, the elimination of gender-based
violence in society and, finally, budget allocations for
the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) and the Goma Declaration. As we do this,
our experience has taught us that the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and, indeed,
of all other resolutions complementary to it, must begin
at the earliest stages of post-conflict peacebuilding;
otherwise, it will not yield optimum results.

It is for this reason that Uganda remains
concerned that the contribution of women to
peacebuilding is far from satisfactory, which can be
attributed to their being excluded from the decision-
making process on the one hand and, on the other, to
inadequate financing of their requirements. This, in the
long run, compromises efforts to attain sustainable
peace and security.

Uganda is aware that the adoption of a resolution
does not automatically translate into its implementation.
This year marks the ninth since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In those nine years, several bottlenecks have
been identified, particularly in post-conflict situations,
ranging from the availability of funding and political
will to a lack of coordination, appropriate capacities
for implementation, as well as institutional monitoring
and evaluation.

Experience has also taught us that a simple
increase in the number of women in talks is not
sufficient and that in-depth consultations are still
required to ensure that nothing is left out with regard to
the legitimate concerns of women.

In this regard, Uganda, in partnership with the
United Nations Population Fund, UNIFEM. and the
Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on Gender Issues, held its first workshop from 14 to
16 September this year to agree on what these
indicators will be for Uganda's action plan. The
workshop, which brought together 35 participants from
Government ministries, civil society organizations and
the international community, identified 16 indicators
out of the total 547 that were originally earmarked for
the implementation of Uganda's action plan.

In conclusion, Uganda welcomes the adoption of
resolution 1889 (2009), as it highlights this deficit and
calls for a response to the needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations for sustainable peace and
security. We also encourage affected Member States to
establish indicators to ensure that their national action
plans for women's participation in post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding are implemented not
only in a practical, effective and coherent fashion, but
also in a way that allows for accountability.

We look forward to the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) in 2010 as a significant
milestone for Uganda's women and, indeed, for all
women everywhere.

