Ms. Misaka: I would like to thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to address it at this debate
on women and peace and security from a civil society
perspective.

I speak today on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security. I am also
here in my capacity as a founding member of the
South Sudanese Diaspora Association and a member
of the EVE Organization for Women Development.
EVE is an organization based in Juba, South Sudan,
that is committed to empowering women and raising
awareness about women, peace and security issues,
including sexual and gender-based violence during
conflict.

I speak here today with a heavy heart, as I continue
to receive reports from my family, friends and my
organization in South Sudan that the violence in our
country has continued to increase. Women in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan internally displaced
persons camp in Bor, which was attacked last week, are
traumatized and devastated, and say they feel as ifthey
are sitting there waiting to die. I am here with members
in the Security Council today, but I live in fear of what
will happen next in my country - and to my family.
Last week in Bentiu, hundreds of men, women, and
children were killed, and men are being pushed to rape
women of different ethnicity.

The sexual violence we have experienced in
South Sudan is indicative of the larger systemic crisis
throughout the world in countries such as Afghanistan,
the Central African Republic, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Syria and Myanmar. I want to
acknowledge the work of civil society groups that are
not present here but are fighting every day to prevent,
document and respond to such crimes. I am also deeply
honoured to acknowledge the civil society groups that
are here today, including Ms. Naw K'nyaw Paw, another
women's human rights defender who is working with
sexual violence survivors in Myanmar.

Today, we call on all the relevant actors, including
Member States, the Security Council, the United
Nations and non-state actors, to take a greater role in
the prevention and treatment of this atrocity and threat
to international peace and security. I will discuss six
ateas of serious concern related to the situation in South
Sudan and sexual violence in all conflicts, including
in those situations that are not in the focus of the
international community.

First, with regard to ending impunity, the Security
Council, Member States and the United Nations must
take on leadership roles and actively advocate for ending
impunity and promoting investigation, documentation
and accountability. At this moment in South Sudan,
mechanisms are being set up to investigate atrocities,
including the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
ofthe Cessation and Hostilities Agreement. In addition,
the African Union Commission of Inquiry is currently
in South Sudan and will be investigating sexual
violence in conflict as part of its mandate. In all cases
of conflict and in all such mechanisms, sexual violence
in conflict must be on the list of types of violence to be
documented. Without documentation, there will be no
accountability.

In South Sudan, women are discriminated against in
laws that do not meet internationally accepted standards
of human and individual rights. Weak judicial systems
lead to a low rate of arrests and convictions. Security
and judicial professionals should receive stronger
training on sexual and gender-based violence. Alleged
perpetrators must be prosecuted, including those with
command responsibility, and women should be active
agents in judicial processes and sectors.

Secondly, we must consider comprehensive
services for survivors. We call on Member States
and United Nations agencies to ensure that survivors
of sexual violence can access, in a timely manner,
nondiscriminatory and comprehensive health services,
which should include, as referenced in Security Council
resolution 2122 (2013), the full range of sexual-violence
and reproductive health services, HIV awareness and
response and access to safe abortion, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Equally important
are psychosocial, legal, livelihood assistance and
other multisectoral services and appropriate services,
especially for adolescent girls.

In South Sudan, survivors of sexual violence face
many barriers to all those services. One challenge is
that survivors do not report abuses early enough, owing
to fear and stigma. They also face systemic barriers,
such as poor infrastructure and the lack of health and
psychosocial services. It is vitally important that the
humanitarian community receive additional technical
and financial resources to meet the specific needs of
women and girls. In turn, the humanitarian community
must ensure that the needs of women and girls are met
when services are provided.

Thirdly, the prohibition of amnesty is another
factor. Ceasefire agreements and peace agreements
must not provide amnesty for sexual violence, as is
stipulated in numerous Security Council resolutions.
That in turn must not be undermined in subsequent
post-conflict mechanisms, including legislative and
constitutional provisions. Amnesty provisions must
not make accountability for sexual-violence crimes
impossible, breach international law or do nothing to
deter perpetrators of sexual violence.

Fourthly, we must work towards women's
meaningful participation in peace negotiations. All
women must have the opportunity to participate
and to have their views and needs represented in
decision-making processes. That requires outreach
to women who have been marginalized, including
young women, indigenous women, those who have
been displaced and those with disabilities. Many of
those groups are at increased risk of being targeted for
conflict-related sexual violence.

Although there are six women involved in the
formal negotiations in South Sudan, as a result of heavy
advocacy by women's groups and the international
community, women are still underrepresented in the
peace process. Seats at the peace table should not be
reserved only for parties to the conflict. That is why
my organization has developed a statement to the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, with
signatories from across South Sudan and Africa, calling
for women's networks and organizations to be part of
the peace process.

Fifthly, we must consider mission mandates. The
Security Council has long recognized, most recently in
its resolution 2122 (2013), that United Nations mission
mandates should include strong and comprehensive
language on all aspects of the women, peace and
security agenda. Following armed attacks in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) camp
in Bor, we have received reports from women living
in the camp who do not feel safe and are requesting
more protection and evacuation. Given the UNMISS
mandate and the large number of women seeking refuge
in UNMISS compounds and internally-displaced-
persons camps, UNMISS must take serious measures
to guarantee the rights of South Sudanese women and
to ensure their protection. In that vein, the Security
Council should urge UNMISS to ensure vetting, pre- or
post-deployment training and sensitization of all troops
on gender-based violence and protection.

In addition, we recognize that United Nations
bodies and international humanitarian organizations
need unhindered access to conflict areas. The denial of
access cannot serve as an excuse for perpetrators and
Governments to avoid their accountability for crimes
of sexual violence.

Sixthly, we need to look at root causes. In South
Sudan, all we want is peace. The prevention of conflict
and dealing with its underlying causes must be given
priority, rather than waiting until it is too late. The
proliferation of arms and light weapons adds to the
insecurity of girls and women. We therefore call
on the Security Council and all actors to focus on
gender-sensitive disarmament and conflict prevention,
including early warning. Member States should ratify
and fully implement the Arms Trade Treaty, particularly
in relation to the prevention of gender-based violence.

Finally, we remind Member States of the importance
of creating space and support for independent civil
society. Local women's rights groups often have
the strategic and political knowledge needed to end
sexual violence and are usually the first to respond to
survivors. All too often, civil society is the only voice
to address ongoing sexual violence in forgotten and
neglected conflicts.

I leave the Council with the story of Sarah, who was
interviewed by our organization in Bentiu, where her
uncle was killed in front of her, her mother was burned
and Sarah herself was raped. She also told us about
10 other women who were shot because they refused
to be raped. We need members of the international
community to work with us in South Sudan. We ask
that they not forget our country, our people, our women.

