Mr. Butagira (Uganda): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important debate. I would also like to
take this opportunity to thank Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women; Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Ms. Ines Alberdi, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, for the
commendable work that they are doing.

I wish to reiterate Uganda's commitment to the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). We take note of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2008/622) and would like to highlight what
Uganda has done.

Women's participation in Uganda's political life
goes beyond elective office and has extended to other
spheres, including peacebuilding and reconciliation
efforts, as stipulated in resolution 1325 (2000). Uganda
has a very advanced, articulate and organized women's
peace movement. Even before the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), my Government had
previously supported the efforts of such women leaders
as Ms. Betty Bigombe, who initially headed the peace
talks from 1994 to 2004 with the Lord's Resistance
Army to end the conflict in the northern part of
Uganda.

The Ugandan Government has also made some
provisions for women's participation in the ongoing
peace talks in Juba. In addition to the two women
directly on the peace team, Uganda has facilitated
women's attendance at meetings. The Ugandan
Government's efforts have been backed by civil society
organization initiatives, such as the Civil Society
Women's Peace Coalition, which has played an
instrumental role in bringing women's voices and
issues to the table through its peace campaigns and
capacity-building programmes for women leaders and
organizations at the community level. Those activities
are in recognition of women's crucial role in sustaining
the community during conflict and in rebuilding
society thereafter.

The Ugandan Government, in collaboration with
its development partners, is currently working on
different recovery programmes to resettle and
rehabilitate displaced communities in conflict-affected
regions. Special provisions are being made for the most
vulnerable groups that include women under the
National Peace Recovery and Development Plan for
northern Uganda. The national machinery has initiated
the process of integrating the gender perspective into
that document so as to ensure that women equally
enjoy the opportunities and benefit from the planned
interventions.

Ugandan women are engaged in peacekeeping
missions. There are currently 16 women police officers
serving in peacekeeping missions in Liberia, the Sudan
and Timor-Leste, and also under the African Union
Mission in Somalia.

Redress for victims of human rights violations is
being addressed. Besides the usual judicial system,
there are proposals to include the use of traditional
justice systems, such as mato oput in northern Uganda,
to resolve and settle grievances without condoning
impunity.

None of those achievements has been made
without some challenges. One of the Government's
major hurdles is that women's participation includes a
limited understanding of resolution 1325 (2000) at all
levels. More workshops and seminars to sensitize
women are crucial. Some of the challenges are being
addressed by civil society organization-led initiatives
that have facilitated skills training for women leaders,
cross-learning visits and consultative meetings at the
community level in a bid to put resolution 1325 (2000)
into practice.

In that regard, the Ugandan Government
welcomes the support and cooperation exhibited by the
United Nations and the international community for
Uganda's efforts at implementing the resolution, in
particular the two-year programme entitled
"Supporting Women's Engagement in Peacebuilding
and Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict:
Community-led Approaches" launched by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women in Uganda in
2007 with the support of the United Kingdom's
Department for International Development.

That programme has focused on supporting
women's access to justice and their participation in
peacebuilding processes. It places special emphasis on
Gulu, Kitgum and Lira Districts by supporting
women's engagement in the Juba peace process and by
working with the Department of Political Affairs to
provide a gender adviser to the United Nations special
envoy, as well as by working to ensure that women's
priorities are addressed in the peace process. The
programme has also supported the launch of a
campaign to increase the presence of women in
northern Uganda's police force to a minimum of 30 per
cent.

At the policy level, the Uganda Women's
Parliamentary Association has undertaken the gender
sensitization of fellow parliamentarians on two
important bills: the Domestic Relations bill and the
Domestic Violence bill, which are under discussions by
competent organs in Uganda. The programme will also
work with local government institutions to adopt
gender-responsive by-laws in the aforementioned
priority districts.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Uganda's
commitment to continue building capacity to
implement resolution 1325 (2000).

