The President: I think that the representative of
Grenada, more gracefully than anyone today, has put
men in their place.

I should like to make a few points in my capacity
as representative of the United Kingdom, while
subscribing also to the statement made by Denmark
earlier on behalf of the European Union.

I think that the three presentations that started off
our debate today have given us a huge amount of
stimulation, followed by a useful and very thought-
provoking debate covering a wide range of issues
relating to women and conflict and peacekeeping.

Conflict has changed, and so we must change.
The United Kingdom recognizes the enormous value of
resolution 1325 (2000) and related gender initiatives in
raising the profile of gender as an issue of real
relevance to conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
peace-building.

But we are concerned here today with
implementation. Rather like Australia, I do not believe
that the Council needs more norm-setting in this area.
We need implementation.

We felt that there were two fundamental reasons
for holding this debate with the objective of building
on resolution 1325 (2000) and not just reiterating it.

The first was to raise the probability that
impunity will be denied to, and good practice will
deter, those who commit or plan to commit violence
against women in an area of conflict. The adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) is, I think, illustrative and only
a starting point in that area.

The second reason for this debate was to
recognize and to reflect in peacekeeping practice the
huge contribution which women can make to conflict
prevention and negotiation and to post-conflict peace-
building. I pay tribute to the United Nations as a whole
for the progress it has made to date in mainstreaming
gender throughout the Organization.

For example, we welcome recent indications from
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations' Lessons
Learned Unit that the presence of women in
peacekeeping operations has improved the
effectiveness of those missions by improving the levels
of access to the local population and increasing the
range of skills, approaches and perspectives in
missions.

We welcome this progress so far, but we have to
recognize it for what it is - merely the start of a much
wider effort. Every part of the United Nations system
that engages with the broad range of issues in the
resolution, from conflict prevention to post-conflict
peace-building - including the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the funds and programmes - must give
appropriate attention to gender perspectives.

It is now readily accepted that gender
mainstreaming is a crucial strategy in the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals. Effective
management of conflict, especially its prevention is,
alongside that, an aspect of the Goals' focus.
Integrating gender perspectives into conflict prevention
work will make the impact of that work all the more
effective.

It is therefore important that Member States
throughout all United Nations bodies express their
political commitment to, and offer direction and
guidance on, gender mainstreaming. We have seen
some excellent examples of this during the recent
substantive session of the Economic and Social
Council, with its first consideration of gender
mainstreaming under a dedicated agenda sub-item. And
may I congratulate the Economic and Social Council
on having adopted yesterday a resolution that takes
forward gender mainstreaming in that Council and its
subsidiary bodies. It is good to see the Councils match
each other in these respects. The Security Council
should aim, as the Economic and Social Council has
done in its resolution, to identify best practice and
encourage its promulgation.
I also commend the important and valuable
contribution made by non-governmental organizations
in this field, both in their cooperation with the United
Nations and Member States and in their independent
and often very courageous activities in conflict zones.

We all know that much remains to be done. We
have hardly scratched the surface of the real problems
on the ground in conflict areas. We hope that this
meeting will help sustain and build on the momentum
created by resolution 1325 (2000) and provide for
further progress in this field through the ideas
presented in this debate, in the response of the
Secretariat and in that of the relevant agencies and
Governments to those ideas.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I will now give the floor to our original speakers
and ask them to pick up any remaining comments and
questions to which they wish to respond.

I give the floor to the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations.

