Ms. Yelich (Canada): Canada, along with all States
represented here today, is deeply concerned by the still
growing trend of sexual violence and abuse targeting
women and girls in conflict situations. We are alarmed
by the recent report (A/HRC/28/18) by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
which points to possible war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide committed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, including rape and sexual slavery
directed against civilian populations in Syria and Iraq.
The reports of thousands of young Yazidi girls bought
and sold in slave markets is nothing short of disturbing.
Unfortunately, these heinous crimes extend far
beyond the tragic conflict in Iraq and Syria. Just
yesterday, we marked the one-year anniversary of the
terrible kidnapping of hundreds of young girls from
their school in northern Nigeria. One year later, the
fate of most of those innocent girls is still unknown. In
addition, the sustained and widespread acts of sexual
Violence perpetrated against women and girls in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains an ongoing
arms.

The sobering fact is that violence against women
and girls is one of the most prevalent human rights
violations in the world today, and we know that the
consequences are only amplified in situations of
conflict.

Canada is proud to contribute to global efforts to
stop the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
Canada's contribution includes vital support for
survivors of sexual violence, including through local
partners, and the documentation of crimes and abuses
so that we can hold perpetrators to account.

Canadians have reaffirmed their concern over
the continuing atrocities in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Our Parliament debated the ongoing
crisis, and Canada's efforts to address sexual violence
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have been
producing results. Since 2006, over 60,000 survivors
have accessed health and psychological support, over
15,000 survivors have acquired new job skills and over
800 perpetrators have been convicted. While this shows
progress, much remains to be done. We must do more,
not only in ISIL-affected areas and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but also in areas affected by
Boko Haram, as well as in the many other countries
listed by the Secretary-General in his excellent report
(S/2015/203) on sexual violence.

Canada is very grateful for the work of Ms. Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Her efforts give voice to
the too many voiceless women and girls that become
survivors of these cowardly and despicable acts.

We must do more to support more survivors and
ensure that they can live in dignity and security within
their families and participate fully in the economic and
social lives of their communities and countries. We
must ensure that the world investigates and documents
these crimes and human rights abuses, and hold those
responsible to account. We must ensure that those in
leadership who order, permit or condone widespread
and systematic sexual violence are tried and prosecuted.
Canada supports the important work of Justice Rapid
Response and UN-Women in deploying trained experts
to do this work. We must do more to ensure areas that
are meant to be a safe haven or a refuge are spaces free
from further sexual Violence against women and girls
and abusive practices, such as child, early and forced
marriage. We must do more to ensure that security
forces are equipped to protect and investigate these
crimes and are not the perpetrators.

Much remains to be done to change the structural
causes of sexual violence in conflict, such as
discrimination and the denial of human rights. Much
remains to be done to change legal and social barriers
that prevent women from fully contributing to the
political and economic lives of their communities.
Women's leadership and participation are essential
tools to address sexual violence in conflict. That is why
I am pleased to be here today to announce an additional
Canadian commitment of $5.4 million as a step towards
achieving these goals.

The year 2015 is a year of opportunity to advance
efforts to end sexual Violence in conflict. That includes
the United Nations reviews on women and peace and
security, and on peace operations. It also includes work
at the Human Rights Council in June to consider draft
resolutions on violence against women and on child,
early and forced marriage. Those are all opportunities
to underline the importance of respect for human rights
and the empowerment of women and girls.

The consequences of this violence are not only
felt by those victimized. The violence affects entire
communities and undermines a country's ability to
prosper. These women and girls must be empowered
to move their communities beyond these tragedies and
ensure that they are fully engaged in all aspects of their
security, economic, social and political development.

The International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent in December will consider a draft
resolution on sexual violence in conflict, with some 170
countries participating. That will be an opportunity for
countries and national societies to pledge actions to end
sexual violence.

Canada remains committed to working at the United
Nations, in other international forums and in countries
of concern to See this work completed. Women and
girls deserve to live in safety and dignity - especially
in conflict situations, when their contributions to
community peace and resilience are so badly needed.
We must redouble our efforts.

