Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): First of all, I would like
to thank the United Kingdom for organizing this very
important open debate here at the Security Council.

Modern slavery is a crime of the twenty-first
century. It is adaptive, cynical, sophisticated and
extremely complex, and, as such, it is a crime that
can be fought only by applying modern, innovative,
adaptable approaches that utilize the findings of new
research and the latest technology. Our actions need to
be tailored to the specific case at hand. Moreover, our
response has to be gender- and age-sensitive, as well as
specific to the type of exploitation in question.

I would like to emphasize the need for the United
Nations to play a leadership role in the fight against
all forms of modern slavery. Today, we are discussing
a topic that is complex. Numerous United Nations
entities - not only the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, but also the International Labour
Organization (ILO), the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the International
Organization for Migration, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UN Women
and UNICEF - are mandated to work on specific
aspects of this challenge.

Unfortunately, duplication of efforts is frequent,
and we can even find competition, and that helps
no one. The complexity of the problem requires a
strengthened, better coordinated and coherent United
Nations response, and it is also the very minimum
that the millions of victims deserve. Moreover, this is
exactly what the leaders of 193 States Members of the
United Nations called for when they adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and what the
Security Council requested in resolution 2331 (2016).

Taking all the foregoing into account, we encourage
the Secretary-General to place this issue high on his
agenda, align it with the prevention-focused reform
efforts and play a proactive role in fostering better
coordination and deepening cooperation, in particular
within but also beyond the United Nations. Appointing
a special envoy tasked with facilitating coordination,
strengthening the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons and/or convening a task
force to guide how the United Nations response should
be further strengthened are just some options.

I wish to announce that later this year, Hungary
will host the regional consultations of the ILO-launched
Alliance 8.7 initiative, the very purpose of which is
to strengthen cooperation and coordination among
United Nations entities and other key stakeholders.
Hungary is looking forward to the 2017 review process
of the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, and we are ready to participate actively in
future discussions.

I truly believe that we have to raise awareness and
make this crime as visible as we can throughout the
world - through the media, through artistic expression,
with journalists and artists working together. We have
to make everybody aware of and understand this crime.
Further, while we encourage the broadest possible
ratification of the Palermo Protocol and the Protocol
of 2014 to the ILO Forced Labour Convention, we wish
to emphasize that effective implementation of these
international instruments is also essential.

Ensuring accountability is a must. States should
step up their efforts to find the perpetrators and bring
them to justice. Given the transboundary nature of these
crimes, international judicial and law enforcement
cooperation is fundamental. In this context, I would
also like to highlight the potential of the mechanism
currently being established to assist in the investigation
and prosecution of those responsible for the most
serious crimes committed in Syria, including those that
fall within the theme of today's open debate. Hungary

has offered its voluntary contribution to the mechanism,
and we encourage others to do the same.
