Mrs. Furman (Israel): Women and girls around the
world are often those who suffer most from conflicts
but are among the last to be included in peace processes
and decision-making. They make up half of the world's
population, they are also proven catalysts of change and
still they are not yet equal partners in the pursuit of
their own peace and security.

Peace and security is not an isolated issue. Conflict
prevention and peacebuilding are greatly influenced
by the advancement of sustainable development, and
we cannot hope to achieve sustainable peace without
due regard for Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5.
Young women and girls, elderly women, women with
disabilities and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
women must all have a voice if we are to effect long-
term change.

My country has been striving for peace and security
since its inception, with women playing a vital role.
Israel has demonstrated repeatedly its commitment to
the women and peace and security agenda and, although
we have not yet achieved full gender equality in that
regard, we have been working towards it on many fronts.
In fact, we were among the first to integrate part of
resolution 1325 (2000) into our national legislation and
a number of our civil society organizations have been
at the forefront of efforts to implement the resolution
in Israel.

Promoting women and girls into leadership roles
begins with an investment in education, promoting
involvement in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, prioritizing women's political and
economic empowerment and changing harmful societal
norms and perceptions. The Israeli Authority for
the Advancement of the Status of Women has been
increasingly active in promoting the participation of
women of all backgrounds in education, the economy
and political processes.

Israel welcomes the steps taken by the Secretary-
General to promote gender equality, gender parity and
the inclusion of women, not only in the context of peace
and security but in the leadership of the United Nations
system as a whole. As an international role model, it
is imperative that the United Nations conduct itself in
accordance with the SDG 5 and the women and peace
and security agenda.

As we work together to reform the United Nations
system and improve its ability to live up to its mandates,
we are encouraged to see initiatives such as the creation
of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs new women, peace and security policy, the
Department of Peace Operations new policy on gender
responsive peacekeeping operations and the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, last year.
We are also heartened by the reported achievement of
gender parity among resident coordinators.

However, while we welcome those positive
developments, we also recognize that many challenges
still remain. As stated by the Secretary-General in
his latest report (S/2019/800), gender expertise has
to be strengthened across the United Nations system
and gender perspectives need to be taken into account
more consistently.

An integral part of promoting the women and peace
and security agenda is creating a safe and encouraging
environment for women and men everywhere to work
together towards peace. Implementing the agenda
without addressing the challenges posed by a culture
of sexual harassment and sexual abuse is like trying to
build a building in the middle of an earthquake. As long
as women are the targets of violence and harassment,
they cannot freely participate in public or political life.
As part of our efforts to assist in that matter, Israel,
along with other Member States and the Secretariat
have been working to eliminate those practices. We
are encouraged to see that the United Nations Member
States and civil society alike are increasingly aware of
those issues and working to confine them to the pages
of history.

We cannot expect to achieve true peace and
security as long as women and girls are excluded from
the process and their abilities to influence the outcomes
are limited. Until the day comes when the full and equal
participation of women in decision-making is a given,
we must all commit to come together to advance the
women and peace and security agenda.

