Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): Croatia has aligned
itself with the statement made by the representative of
the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union,
but I would like to add a few points based on Croatia's
specific experience and achievements on the matter.

At the outset, allow me, on behalf of my
delegation, to commend the Romanian presidency for
organizing this open debate to mark the fifth
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security.

Since 2000, the international community has
increasingly come to recognize not only how much
conflict particularly affects women and girls, but also
how often women hold the key to its peaceful
resolution. It will be important to examine ways in
which the provisions of this important cross-cutting
resolution can be better implemented at the regional
and national levels.

Croatia welcomes the United Nations system-
wide action plan produced by the Secretary-General
(see S/2005/636), which aims at highlighting the
importance of gender perspectives in conflict
prevention and peacekeeping activities. In order to
achieve success in the post-war confidence-building
process it is essential to include women as active
participants in post-conflict reintegration and
reconstruction. That has also been borne out by
Croatia's experience.

The protection of women in armed conflict and
women's fundamental role in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding cannot be evaluated without taking into
account that women are among those most affected by
violence and the economic instability resulting from
armed conflict. Yet, when it comes to negotiating
peace, post-war reconstruction and reconciliation,
women are grossly underrepresented. We should
continue to press the main bodies of the United
Nations, particularly its funds and programmes, to
strengthen the participation of women in their work
and to streamline gender issues. Post-conflict
transition, recovery and reconstruction cannot be
achieved if gender equality and the promotion of
women's rights are absent.

Croatia welcomes the increased involvement of
women in peacekeeping operations, especially among
human rights and humanitarian personnel, military
observers and civilian police. In that connection, we
strongly encourage the practice of mainstreaming the
gender perspective into peacekeeping operations. At
the same time, we must increase our efforts to improve
the protection of women in armed conflict, parallel to
acknowledging and enhancing their contribution to
peace processes and to rebuilding their communities.

The Commission for Gender Equality of the
Republic of Croatia - an intergovernmental
commission entrusted with creating policies and
coordinating all activities for the promotion of gender
equality - incorporated a chapter on women and
armed conflict in the national policy for the promotion
of gender equality for the period 2001-2005 and in its
implementation programme. Both documents were
adopted by the Croatian parliament in December 2001.

Some tangible results have already been achieved
in pursuing the goals set out in the national policy. One
such result was the inclusion of the study of
international humanitarian law and human rights in the

curriculum of the Croatian military academy as an
integral part of the military education of the armed
forces. Special emphasis is placed on the promotion
and protection of women's human rights and the
introduction of measures aimed at combating violence
against women in war, in armed conflict and during
post-conflict transition.

We seek to apply a gender perspective in
Croatia's participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. During 2005, two Croatian women officers
have been serving in the peacekeeping missions in
India and Pakistan and in Cyprus. Currently, five
women officers from the Croatian armed forces are
serving within the German contingent of the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
Preparations are taking place for a female officer to
serve as a military psychologist in the peacekeeping
mission in Haiti. In addition, a captain of the Croatian
armed forces was the first female officer to take part in
the Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan.

Of course, the success of the application of the
principles and underlying themes of resolution 1325
(2000) rests with Member States. In that regard, there
is more that we all can do to ensure that women can
fully and equally participate at all levels of decision-
making with regard to conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding.

