Ms. Cardona Moscoso (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Conflict-related sexual
violence involves a series of crimes against humanity
that have devastating and irreversible consequences
for its victims. The Security Council must address the
issue on a more regular basis, which is why we thank
the presidency of Peru for its initiative in convening
this open debate. We would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for her
leadership in making this issue more visible. Moreover,
we thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Razia Sultana for their briefings.

Bolivia believes that conflict-related sexual
violence is one of the most heinous acts against
humanity because its emotional and physical
consequences continue to affect its survivors long after
the conflicts end. The international community must
band together to tackle this problem and coordinate its
efforts to implement measures at the national, regional
and international levels.

Over the past 18 years, the Security Council has
been developing a series of resolutions that attempt to
provide a comprehensive response to sexual violence
in conflict, which indubitably poses a serious threat
to international security and a real impediment to the
achievement of peace in countries that are victims
of armed confrontation. Despite those resolutions,
however, sexual violence in conflict continues to be a
cruel reality in the daily lives of millions of people.

It is imperative that the Security Council be resolute
in the implementation of its resolutions on combating
sexual violence in conflict by promoting accountability
and implementing the zero-tolerance policy. We
believe that the Secretary-General's suggestions in his
recent report (S/2018/250) are correct, especially with
regard to including sexual violence in the designation
criteria for sanctions and in ensuring that the sanctions
committees can access information from an expert on
gender and conflict-related sexual violence.

Although sexual violence in conflict knows no
gender, it mostly affects women and girls, who are
subjected to rape, sexual slavery, prostitution, forced
marriage and sterilization, trafficking in persons and
other forms of violence with terrible consequences
for the physical and psychological well-being of the
victims. Very often, instead of receiving protection and
assistance, they are marginalized and rejected in their
own communities.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war and terrorism is most
alarming. In that regard, the international community
must work together to support national initiatives
geared towards the social reintegration of survivors and
their children so that they can fully enjoy their rights.

Likewise, the increasing risk of sexual violence
in refugee camps and during displacement is another
challenge with which the international community must
grapple. Insecurity during displacement, lack of access
to basic services for refugees and the prolongation of
conflicts that impede a safe return are all difficult
conditions that millions of people now experience. An
example is the situation on the border between Myanmar
and Bangladesh. We highlight Bangladesh's goodwill
in providing refuge to the Rohingya people, and we
encourage Myanmar to continue working with the
United Nations to ensure the safe, voluntary, dignified
and sustainable return of the displaced persons.

We believe that women's empowerment as a
preventive measure, access to justice and accountability
are fundamental elements in the fight against sexual
violence. However, it is clear that, in order to promote
such measures, we must first address the root causes
of conflict, reduce structural inequalities, combat
extreme poverty and eradicate the discrimination that
patriarchal systems have left entrenched in society and
that prevent women from enjoying unhindered personal
development and access to justice.

Prevention is a very important tool that the
Secretary-General has been promoting over the past
year. Increasing the cooperation between the United
Nations and civil society is essential for prevention,
in order to access more specific information that
will enable us to carry out more reliable analyses of
the situation.

It is key to promote the participation of women
in peace, security and development processes, and
to include in the agreements specific content on the
inclusion of women, the fight against sexual violence
and the elimination of impunity. The political
empowerment of women should be promoted by
States through concrete measures that transform the
conditions of abuse and discrimination in which women,
minorities and rural populations live. Afghanistan has
provided a good example of legal and constitutional
transformation for women in its work to implement
its national action plan for Afghan women, which has
proved to be an encouraging development, despite the
fact that major challenges remain.

Similarly, close cooperation with regional
organizations is also of the utmost importance. Last
year, the Deputy Secretary-General visited Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was
very significant for the joint work of the United Nations
and the African Union. That type of approach is very
important for the implementation of the gender, peace
and security programme on the African continent,
as well as for the strengthening of other existing
mechanisms. We also highlight the establishment of
the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, which was set up
through a peace agreement led by the African Union,
with technical support from the United Nations. Despite
the time it is taking to implement, it is a collaborative
initiative that we should continue to encourage. That
said, we believe that we have good tools for continuing
our struggle against sexual violence. Many challenges
lie ahead, and we must therefore strengthen the
commitment of the Security Council and the United
Nations system in general.

