Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First, let me congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council. We wish you every success and
you can count on our support. I also wish to thank our
South African colleagues for their very able stewardship
of the Council's work in October.

Let me express our appreciation for the very
informative briefings delivered by the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed.

We welcome the joint mission of United Nations and
African Union representatives to the Horn ofAfrica. We
see it as a practical implementation of the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union in
addressing Africa's peace and security challenges in a
coordinated and comprehensive manner. Over the years,
the Horn of Africa has been perceived as a volatile
and conflict-ridden region of the continent. Today,
we are witnessing new, promising political dynamics.
The Horn of Africa now has a unique opportunity to
finally overcome its history of conflicts and poverty
and collectively work together to forge a future of peace
and progress.

In order for those transitions to be successful and
for peace in the region to be durable, the meaningful
participation of women is crucial. The meaningful and
full participation of women in the peace process and
broader political processes is about not only ensuring
that women and men will be equally represented, but
also the quality of that participation. It is all about
women's leadership. The women of the Horn of Africa
deserve an equal seat at every table at which decisions
are made. We encourage the region to ensure that
women have a strong voice in decision-making, from
the initial peacemaking process to the establishment
and development of local and national governmental
institutions. We know that there are women who are
adequately trained for those roles, that women are
available for high-level appointments and, further still,
that qualified women are everywhere.

In that context, we welcome the recent appointment
of women to senior decision-making positions in
the Sudan. In the case of Somalia, we hope that the
authorities will secure a 30 per cent quota for women
in the upcoming elections, which will offer a historic
opportunity for women to participate in the first
universal suffrage elections that the country has held
in 50 years.

The evidence shows that security efforts are more
successful and sustainable when women contribute to
prevention and early warning, mediation, peacekeeping,
post-conflict resolution and rebuilding. Ifwe are serious
about our commitment to a more peaceful, sustainable
and prosperous Horn of Africa, there is simply no
alternative to investing in women, giving them a voice in
all relevant decision-making processes and supporting
their political, social and economic empowerment.
Poland believes that the Security Council will remain
united in encouraging the participation of women in
political life in the Horn of Africa, and by doing so will
continue to contribute to achieving durable peace and
development in the region.

