Ms. Kei'ta Diakite (NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I speak
today on behalf ofthe NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security. I am also here in my capacity as
the President of the Peace and Security Network of
Women of the Area of the Economic Community of
West African States.

We at the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security appreciate the ongoing work by
numerous actors to combat violence against women,
including the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We also welcome the analysis and recommendations in
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/ 149)
on conflict-related sexual violence, including the
recommendations that emphasize the ongoing necessity
for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
security-sector reform programmes that are explicitly
gender-responsive. The report highlights the urgency
of addressing sexual violence in conflict in various
situations - such as Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab
Republic. The report also highlights the devastating
impact of sexual violence in the conflict in my own
country, Mali.

Effectively addressing the complexities of conflict-
related sexual violence requires powerful and urgent
leadership at all levels, the local, national, regional
and international. Commitment and action in times of
conflict, as well as post-conflict times and times of
peace, are essential.

Today I will address several key areas where making
progress is essential, namely, women's participation
and equality, prevention, response, accountability, and
resources.

With regard to participation and equality, sexual
violence in conflict brutally reinforces the notion that
women are not equal to men, and that they can be
violated with total impunity. Achieving sustainable
peace and the elimination of sexual violence in conflict
will continue to be impossible if the root causes of
inequality are not addressed. In practice, that means
ensuring women's equality at every stage of the peace
process and that all peace agreements include effective
responses to crimes committed against women. And that
means including guarantees of women's human rights
in the content of peace agreements, stating that sexual
Violence violates ceasefire agreements, and forbidding
amnesty for sexual crimes. Forceful action must be
taken on this issue, particularly in order to ensure that
the international community rejects peace agreements
lacking women's participation and involvement, and
also that political processes ensure that women's human
rights are protected and that women representatives are
included in the decision-making process.

The prevention of sexual violence in conflict
and of the underlying causes of conflict itself is the
most powerful instrument we have. As the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2013/149) demonstrates, and
as I myself saw in Mali in recent months, there is a
devastating link between the flow of arms and the
perpetration of sexual violence. The members of the
NGO Working Group have campaigned for an arms
trade treaty that takes into account the problems
associated with discrimination against women, not
because women are vulnerable but because we are
targets. It is now up to Member States to recognize
how much the availability of arms affects violence
against women and women's participation in social
and political life. We call on States to uphold their
commitments regarding women and peace and security
in all disarmament processes.

In cases of sexual violence, the response to
victims and survivors is crucial. Survivors and their
families have the right to adequately funded medical,
psychological and legal support and rehabilitation
programmes. Without such services, victims' physical
and mental health can be irreparably damaged. Besides
that, impunity for perpetrators too often remains the
norm. In Mali, the 2012 military coup d'etat drove
many of those providing services for victims out of the
country, leaving survivors without access to emergency
medical services or to any psychological help. With
the support of UN-Women, my organization, the
Association of Malian Jurists, and some others were
able to partially fill that gap. But the political crisis
highlights just how precarious the situation remains
for survivors and service providers. In addition, with
services mainly concentrated in Bamako, many female
victims of the conflict in the north of the country were
unable to get help.

Comprehensive services, from medical to
psychological to legal, must be available, safe and
easily accessible by the victims. Medical care for
survivors must be of the highest quality possible and
provided in accordance with international humanitarian
law and World Health Organization guidelines,
while recognizing the right of women and girls to
non-discriminatory medical care, including the right to
terminate a pregnancy resulting from rape.

With regard to accountability and reparations,

impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence,
unfortunately, remains overwhelmingly the norm. In the
context of conflict, the reform ofthe security andjustice
sectors must ensure that crimes of sexual violence are
effectively addressed and responded to. Every recourse
to justice, including referrals to the International
Criminal Court, should be pursued. Reparations, as the
Secretary-General's report says, can be an important
form of transitional justice for all Victimes of sexual
violence, especially women and girls, and an important
tool for redress and acknowledgement of suffering
borne. Such efforts should include activities aimed at
combating the stigma that accompanies crimes of sexual
violence. In Mali, for example, we need collective
recognition of the crimes of sexual Violence that have
been committed during the conflict. In the absence of
such recognition, women who attempt to seek justice
often have great difficulty accessing courts, and many
are even accused of being prostitutes. It is imperative
that survivors of sexual violence cease to be blamed
and victimized when they seek assistance and justice.

Concerning support for the work of organizations
headed by women, civil society plays a key role in
combating sexual violence in conflict. Sufficient
resources must be directed to civil-society organizations
led by women, particularly those that help victims and
that give women access to justice and the political
decision-making process. Because of the nature of their
work, defenders of women's human rights continue to
be the target of attacks and threats in many parts of the
world. Member States should immediately take the steps
necessary to ensure that such defenders are protected
and supported, and to recognize and reduce the risks
they face. In that way the States Members of the United
Nations, particularly those on the Security Council, can
ensure that the voices of the victims of sexual violence
are heard and their situation is improved.

When conflict and violence arose in Mali, we
women mobilized for peace but, sadly, had neither the
power nor the training needed to make our voices heard.
With the assistance of international partners, including
UN-Women, 80 Malian women have been trained in
mediation, negotiation and mobilization - skills that
are essential to ensuring that women in danger can be
heard.

Today I have discussed several examples from
my country, Mali, but, sadly, there are many similar
examples in many other countries. In all those countries,
we are aware of how we need to work together to prevent,
to respond, to have accountability and to ensure that
women can achieve their full potential. While we have
made great strides in terms of identifying the scourge
of sexual violence in conflict, we look forward with
impatience to the day when the commitments made by
so many of those in the Chamber bear fruit.

