Ms. Heyzer: All of us have our impressions. The
kinds of impressions that we make and the kinds of
positions that we take come from our life experiences.
The representative of Singapore has the unusual
opportunity to come from a place that is relatively
secure. So maybe some of these issues appear to be
politically correct rather than being something very
urgent that needs to be addressed.

But I also know that, especially in countries in
areas of conflict - and especially when I have been
with the women on the ground - these are not
politically correct situations. They are life-and-death
situations. They are situations that can make a
difference. What we decide on here to guide them will
really make a difference. Therefore, it is not with the
invisible elephant of scepticism but rather in efforts to
change our perceptions, enlarge our experiences and
immerse ourselves in the reality of the other that we
tend to represent in a situation of this nature.

We have been very much involved in trying to
bring women from all sides together in the peace
process. In fact, with regard to the discussion on the
Sudan, for many years we have brought together
women from the north and south and have supported
the work of Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). In fact, it was precisely the
death of a woman from IGAD that caused many of
these issues to be raised, with a lot of pressure from
there. The same is true of the Burundi process; the
same is true of the Congo process, and of Guatemala. I
could go on. Literally in every conflict we have tried to
bring together women across ethnicities and
boundaries.

What difference does it make? It makes a
difference in terms of the issues that it has put onto the
peace accords - issues that nobody would want to talk
about because of shame, because they could not
articulate them, or because there was no representation
of them. These are issues of land rights, rape babies,
the whole systematic violation of women and redress.
There is a whole variety of issues that, unless women
were present, would not be put onto the peace table.

The same is also true of the participation of
women in post-crisis situations. The fact that we
helped the training of women in East Timor has
allowed them to make sure that, in the restructuring of
the constitution, women's voices are there, and that
there is in fact realignment because there is a new
opportunity to ensure that the new constitution aligns
itself with some of the norms and standards set by the
United Nations, including the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women
(CEDAW).

There are many ways in which women have made
a difference. They have made a difference because they
know that that is the only way in which they can have a
future for themselves and their children.

