Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Latvia and Estonia. Our
countries would like to join others in thanking you, Sir,
for organizing this open debate on the important issue
before us. We fully align ourselves with the statement
delivered no behalf of the European Union.
We thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura
and Ms. Misaka for their statements. We also thank
the Secretary-General for the comprehensive report on
which today's discussion is based (S/2014/181).

Both of our countries agree with the Secretary-
General that important advances have recently been
made on the issue before us. It is crucial that we now
focus on converting these political commitments into
concrete action - that is, prevention and services on
the ground. Indeed, the Security Council, through its
five resolutions, has developed a robust framework to
prevent and address sexual violence in armed conflict.
However, gender crimes remain an enduring part of
most armed conflicts and rape continues to be used as
a weapon of war.

We are concerned by the alarming facts reflected
in the report that, despite the extensive legal framework
we have been able to agree on, violations continue,
or are even on the rise. Among other things, we have
been informed about an increase in reported incidents
of sexual violence in Afghanistan, and there are clear
indications that conflict-related sexual violence has
been a main feature of attacks in the Central African
Republic and a consistent characteristic of the crisis in
South Sudan.

Estonia and Latvia believe that accountability for
sexual violence crimes is crucial for deterring and
ultimately preventing their commission, and for doing
justice by victims. To date, sexual and gender-based
violence as a war crime or crime against humanity has
been prosecuted primarily at the international level. As
the only permanent international criminal tribunal, the
International Criminal Court (ICC) therefore has an
important role to play where States lack the capacity
or political will to hold perpetrators to account. The
Council itself has also acknowledged on numerous
occasions that the fight against impunity for sexual
violence crimes has been strengthened through the
work of the ICC.

However, the ICC will never be able to ensure
accountability on its own. To reverse the near complete
impunity that perpetrators of sexual violence currently
enjoy, it is important that States build the capacity to
ensure accountability. States lacking the necessary
national legislation to investigate and prosecute
perpetrators should therefore incorporate the ICC's
provisions into their own legal systems. We would
emphasize here that the ICC Statute has some important
innovative provisions. For instance, the scope of
crimes of sexual violence in international law has been
expanded, acknowledging that sexual violence can be
committed against both men and women. It also provides
safeguards to ensure that victims of sexual violence can
testify without being put on trial themselves and with
minimal re-traumatization.

By serving as a model for the international
community, the ICC's accomplishments can therefore
be seen as part of a broad-based effort to adequately
address sexual violence at both the international and
domestic levels. Given its pivotal role, the Court should
enjoy the support and cooperation of all States, the
Council and international and regional organizations.
In order to enhance accountability, the Council could
adopt targeted measures against those responsible for
conflict-related sexual violence and include individuals
sought by the ICC on the sanctions lists.

The Secretary-General's report describes the
increased incidents of forced marriage, campaigns
of forced pregnancy and the fact that lives are being
put at risk through unsafe abortions. We call on
everyone to respect what we have agreed concerning
the full enjoyment of human rights by all women and
girls. In addition, I would especially like to stress the
importance of quality sexual and reproductive health
services for survivors.

It is of utmost importance that peacekeepers
continue to be trained to enhance their capacity to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence,
that women protection advisers be deployed within
peacekeeping and special political missions, and that
ceasefire or peace agreements explicitly reflect sexual
violence considerations
Latvia and Estonia commend United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict and the efforts of
the United Nations system to establish the monitoring
and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence, as mandated by resolution 1960 (2010). We
would also like to commend the work of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict for assisting Governments in building national
capacity and expertise in addressing impunity for
those crimes. Estonia supported the Team of Experts
financially in 2013 and plans to do so again this year.

In conclusion, let me stress once more an evident
fact that, regrettably, does not yet seem to be very
evident to everyone in the world - the use of sexual
violence as a method of war must stop. It is an inhuman
practice that, as Ms. Bangura has rightly pointed out,
should belong to the history books and not to everyday
reality.

