Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to thank South Africa for convening this
important meeting and giving us the opportunity to
speak before the Council. I also commend South Africa
for its efforts in presiding over the Council for the
month of October. I thank the Secretary-General for his
valuable briefing and report (S/2019/800) and all of the
briefers for their insights, which have served to enrich
our discussion today.

Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the historical resolution 1325 (2000).
That gives us the chance to reflect on what we have
achieved so far in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda and other relevant subsequent
Council resolutions. With respect to the participation
of women at all decision-making levels, which is a key
pillar of Egypt's 2030 vision for the empowerment of
women, I should like to briefly address the national
efforts we are making to promote the role of women in
the area of peace and security.

The Egyptian Government adopted an initiative in
May with a View to developing an integrated national
action plan on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). That plan is aimed at ensuring the full
participation of women in achieving peace and security.
To that end, Egypt is currently deploying 48 Egyptian
women - and working to increase that number- among
our forces participating in United Nations peacekeeping
missions in various parts of the world. In that context,
Egypt fully endorses the Secretary-General's agenda
of a zero-tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.
Egypt was one of the first countries to join the
Secretary-General's initiative to prevent and respond
to sexual exploitation and abuse. We also joined the
Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points
Network and the voluntary compact on preventing and
addressing sexual exploitation and abuse.

Since 2017, Egypt has been proposing that the
General Assembly adopt a resolution to include an
agenda item on this issue. We have constantly promoted
a comprehensive approach to responding to the crimes
of sexual exploitation and abuse at the level of the United
Nations system as a whole. We also stress the importance
of ensuring accountability for perpetrators of those
crimes and providing all necessary assistance to their
victims. In that context and for the sake of prevention,
the Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding provides training
courses for military and police components, including
for Egyptians, Arabs and Africans who contribute to
United Nations peacekeeping missions, in cooperation
with specialized United Nations agencies, such as UN-
Women and the United Nations Population Fund. Those
courses provide military and police components with
the information and necessary training to deal with
sexual abuse and exploitation in conflict regions. They
also raise awareness of participants on the various
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda.

Egypt has placed the implementation of women
and peace and security agenda at the top of its list
of priorities during its current chairmanship of the
African Union. We are working to launch programmes
with a view to building the capacities of brotherly
African nations through cooperation with relevant
African organizations, including the Network of
African Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation,
the League of Arab States and relevant regional
organizations, in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda. We are also working on launching
an Arab women mediators network in order to ensure
the integration of all efforts at the national, regional
and international levels.

In conclusion, Egypt is committed to pursuing its
serious and relentless work to ensure the empowerment
of women at the economic, social and political levels,
as we firmly believe that women play a robust, effective
and necessary role in transformation and building
processes towards the achievement of peace, security
and sustainable development. I wish to close by once
again thanking you, Mr. President, and South Africa for
convening this meeting and giving us the opportunity
to speak before the Council.

