Mr. Chevalier (Belgium) (spoke in French): As
we speak - at this very moment - thousands of
women are victims of sexual violence in its most
atrocious forms. Who among us has not reacted with
horror when reading the reports on the sexual violence
committed against women in the Kivus in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, or in the Sudan?
Therefore, some might wonder: what is the point of
another debate in these hushed halls of the United
Nations? We have the duty to answer that question by
going beyond statements and reaffirming our political
commitment to combating violence against women,
using all means at our disposal. This public debate on
strengthening the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, is thus
particularly timely, because it is urgent to act.
Therefore, I would like to warmly thank the presidency
for having organized this debate.

Nearly seven years ago, the Security Council
adopted its ground-breaking resolution on women and
peace and security. Today, unfortunately, we must note
that the issues and the challenges posed remain fully
relevant. Despite the efforts of the United Nations
system, described in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2007/567), and despite efforts on all our
part, the resolution's objectives have not been attained.

My country is particularly concerned about the
persistent scourge of gender-based acts of violence,
particularly in armed conflicts. The momentum
unleashed by resolution 1325 (2000) has helped to
accelerate the raising of awareness about that scourge.
A doctrine against this type of crime is in the process
of being developed. Various United Nations forums as
well as Member States have contributed to that effort.
Here, I should like to recall the Brussels Call to Action
to Address Sexual Violence in Conflict and Beyond.

But we need more than awareness-raising if we
are to implement the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) in that regard. Belgium calls for closer Security
Council follow-up and for the development of tools to
that end. Indeed, the Council should have at its
disposal a horizontal report on gender-based acts of
violence in the armed conflicts on its agenda. Such a
report should draw on all sources available within the
United Nations system and elsewhere. The experience
acquired in combating the use of child soldiers has
shown us the importance of this type of instrument.
Such a report should also enable us to define better-
targeted and far more effective actions.

Strengthening the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in its entirety is a collective duty. The
Security Council can and must do more when it defines
the mandates of peacekeeping missions. In general
terms, it must take greater account of the situation of
women in the conflict in question. In fact, depending
on the case, women can be not only potential victims,
but also major actors in the political or socio-economic
areas, or even combatants - actors in the conflict.
Women continue to be underrepresented in peace and
reconstruction processes.

That preliminary analysis must be translated into
better-defined mandates, in the spirit of resolution
1325 (2000). Clearer mandates will facilitate follow-up
by peacekeeping missions on issues related to
resolution 1325 (2000) on the ground and will facilitate
reporting to the Security Council. Moreover, the need
to mainstream the gender perspective in peacekeeping
mandates applies not only to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, but also to the peacekeeping
missions of regional organizations such as the
European Union and the African Union.

As you yourself, Mr. President, emphasized in
your invitation to this debate, the role and the
responsibility of Member States in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) cannot be overestimated. At
the national level, Belgium has prepared a charter for
its armed forces to promote the equality of women and
men; in particular, it takes into account the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) within the framework of
operations conducted abroad. Training on the gender
perspective is an integral part of preparing troops who
will take part in a mission.

Furthermore, resolution 1325 (2000) now serves
as a point of reference for the identification of
assistance projects eligible for financial support from
Belgium. The formulation of a national plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is also under
way.

Today's debate reminds us once again that action
to meet these challenges goes beyond the Security
Council's sphere of action. It is therefore important
that all United Nations forums shoulder their
responsibility to strengthen their implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In that context, we welcome
the debate planned in the Commission on the Status of
Women at its forthcoming session, to be held in 2008.
In conclusion, the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) represents an extremely complex
challenge. The Security Council must show the way
forward. We believe it is urgent to strengthen its
capacity to follow up on problems related to gender-
based acts of violence in armed conflict. To that end,
the Council must have better-targeted reporting at its
disposal.

