Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to thank
Togo, as the holder of the presidency of the Security
Council, for organizing today's open debate on this
important issue. My thanks also go to the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative Margot Wallstrom,
Ms. Amina Megheirbi and Under-Secretary-General
Herve Ladsous for their insightful briefings and
statements.

The issue on our agenda today is one of the most
abhorrent, yet still all too often concealed and
underreported, of crimes. In a number of armed
conflicts sexual violence is used as a weapon of war,
thus not only destroying its victims but traumatizing
societies at large. Widespread and systematic sexual
violence ranks among the grave breaches of
international law, as reflected in the 1998 Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court and in the 1949
Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocols.

The Security Council has recognized the threat of
conflict-related sexual violence to peace and security.
Resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
have been historic responses to a heinous reality.
However, the disturbing situation on the ground,
reflected in the recent report (S/2011/33) of the
Secretary-General and in today's briefings, underlines
the strong imperative to keep up the fight.

Germany very much welcomes the setting up of
the new monitoring and reporting mechanism and
commends Special Representative Wallstrom and all
United Nations and civil society organizations working
on this issue, for their indispensable work. We hope
that the women protection advisers will be deployed
shortly. Prevention is an important aspect of the
Special Representative's mandate. The Security
Council needs to be properly informed about all
possible threats to peace and security.

What more can the Security Council, United
Nations organizations and Member States do? First,
our key goal should be prevention, and not mere
reaction. To facilitate such an approach, exact and
reliable data and early warning mechanisms - as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report - are
crucial. Awareness-raising and training, especially for
peacekeepers and police officers, should also be high
on our agenda. Whenever a peacekeeping mandate is
renewed, the Council needs to make sure that it also
contains provisions to monitor sexual violence.

Small arms are another aspect that is often
overlooked when discussing the prevention of
Violence, but one that was mentioned today by the
Special Representative. There is some evidence that,
especially after an armed conflict, the ready
availability of small arms increases the threat of their
use, especially against women and children.

Secondly, we must accelerate our fight against
impunity. Perpetrators have to be brought to justice.
Bearing in mind the main responsibility of States to
investigate and prosecute, the Security Council also
has a role to play. We therefore welcome the inclusion
in the Secretary-General's report, for the first time, of
an annex listing parties that are credibly suspected of
patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict on the Council's agenda.

12-2393]
Naming and shaming is not an end in itself, but should
serve as a basis for targeted measures leading to the
end of those terrible crimes. The International Criminal
Court and international monitoring mechanisms have
also done important work in that regard, and should be
further strengthened.

Thirdly, we need greater resolve on ensuring the
participation of women at all stages of peace processes.
As an example, the issue of sexual violence has not yet
figured in most ceasefire or peace agreements. The
Department for Political Affairs has developed an
interesting new tool to start closing that gap, namely,
new mediation guidelines that take into account the
issue of sexual violence. The guidelines, which of
course cover other aspects as well, will be presented on
9 March at the German Mission. It is my pleasure to
invite everyone to attend that event.

Fourthly, reparation schemes and funding
frameworks should be guided by a survivor-focused
approach. Both physical and mental scars have to be
treated in order to allow survivors to once again
actively participate in their societies. We commend the
valuable work done by United Nations organizations,
especially the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of
Actions to Eliminate Violence against Women, which
Germany actively supports, as well as the newly
created team of experts that advises Member States,
upon their request, to combat sexual violence in or
after conflict.

Let me conclude by stressing that we cannot
separate the challenge of sexual violence from the
broader security issues on the agenda of the Council.
We need the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to continue her important work. Germany will
actively support her in her endeavour.

