Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Mr. President, I
congratulate you on having convened this important
debate. I am also grateful to Ms. Wallstrom for her
presentation. Her invaluable work on the issue has
been crucial in helping the Council to address the
scourge of sexual violence. I also thank Under-
Secretary-General Herve Ladsous for his remarks.

We have come a long way since the adoption of
resolution 1820 (2008). The development of an
important body of norms and tools has enhanced the
international community's capacity to resolutely
respond to sexual violence in armed conflict.

We welcome the progress made on the
development of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements. For those arrangements to be effective,
it is essential that they have the support of the broader
United Nations membership and not only of the
Security Council. To that end, Brazil encourages
Ms. Wallstrom to engage in a dialogue with Member
States and regional groups, with a view to both
clarifying how the arrangements will work and
exchanging views on how they can best operate.

The presence of women's protection advisers in
peacekeeping operations will constitute a very helpful
tool in the efforts to make the fight against sexual
violence a mission-wide endeavour. However,
prevention will be effective only if peacekeeping
operations have the resources they need to implement
their mandate. In that regard, we commend the
improvements made in predeployment training, which
are of crucial importance to preparing peacekeepers to
carry out this critical task.

The signing last December of a letter of intent
between the Brazilian Ministry of Defence and
UN-Women, aimed at consolidating their existing
partnership, will contribute to ensuring more
comprehensive training for our peacekeepers, including
in preventing and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence.

Making real progress in our efforts against sexual
violence in armed conflict requires greater emphasis on
prevention and capacity-building. The only way to
ensure that the progress achieved during the presence
of a peacekeeping mission is sustainable is by working
with national Governments to address their needs in
the areas of institution-building, the training of
personnel, supporting victims and strengthening the
rule of law.

We very much appreciate the work that has been
done by the Team of Experts on Sexual Violence and
the support it has been providing to Member States in
strengthening their institutions. It is somewhat
surprising that such crucial work is financed
exclusively by voluntary contributions.

Real change requires an integrated approach that
combines prevention, the fight against impunity and
support for victims. The United Nations needs to be
prepared to support capacity-building and institutional
strengthening as a system-wide priority if we want
prevention to be effective and the scourge of sexual
violence in armed conflict to be eliminated.

