Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
women and peace and security, an issue of particular
interest to the delegation of Bangladesh. Allow me to
recall, with a modicum of pride, that Bangladesh was
closely associated with the elaboration and adoption of
that landmark resolution, resolution 1325 (2000), as a
then-member of the Council.

Women and girls are the main victims of conflict
situations. The inherent discrimination and inequalities
that women suffer, by and large, can be and often are
further deepened in post-conflict situations. Also, in
peace and conflict resolution processes, women are the
ones who are the most deprived. Their voices are not
fully listened to, or even heard. The international
community has been increasingly forthcoming in its
resolve to undertake concerted measures to prevent
gender-based violence.

However, eight years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), sexual violence persists in
conflict situations and in peace. We need to reflect
further on how best we can address the issues of sexual
violence, including its root causes. We need to analyse
the challenges and how those can be overcome. There
is no denying the fact that we need to ensure adequate
representation of women at all levels of decision-
making in conflict prevention and in post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation. The true measure of
women's participation in peace negotiations is not
through numbers, but through power in decision-
making. In the consolidation of peace, although the
role of women remains a vital factor, it is often
ignored.

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
has recorded some progress. We hope that the
remaining shortcomings will be addressed in the
updated 2008-2009 action plan. A number of
constraints persist. There is an inadequate
understanding of the gender dimension in conflict
08-39081
situations. That leads to gaps in capacity at the
institutional and organizational levels to address
various provisions of the resolution. Without adequate
attention to and understanding of gender relations and
inequalities, women will continue to remain excluded
from peacebuilding initiatives. As a result of such
situations, their needs are not fully understood. We
need to further intensify our efforts in incorporating the
gender perspective at all levels of peacebuilding. We
also need to create expertise to address the issues
related to sexual violence. One way to augment
capacity is to facilitate women's participation in both
formal and informal negotiations in the peace process.

The availability of gender-disaggregated data is
particularly important in understanding the situation of
women and girls who are victims of war and conflict. A
focused examination of issues specifically related to
Violence against women is also important in the
formulation of policy guidelines. That is an exercise
that will assist in undertaking preventive measures.
The sharing of experiences, good practices and lessons
learned on a regular basis is useful not only in
sustaining peace but also in guiding policy measures.

Peacekeeping operations are no longer limited to
military activities. They now have broader mandates to
assist in elections, monitor human rights and carry out
police functions. Multifaceted peacekeeping operations
thus have great potential in addressing the security of
women. To that effect, we have successfully integrated
the gender perspective in some aspects of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. However, in post-
conflict peacebuilding efforts much remains to be
done. As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Bangladesh remains vigilant in our focus on the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).

As one of the largest contributors of troops to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Bangladesh is
ever conscious of our responsibility to incorporate
gender dimensions, particularly the essential elements
of resolution 1325 (2000). At present, Bangladesh has
more than 30 women police personnel deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
percentage of women as peacekeepers and police from
Bangladesh are set to increase in coming days.

We recognize that a strong Security Council
mechanism is needed to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Establishing a working group
on women and peace and security might be useful and
a good option in that regard. It is our belief that
integrating the gender perspective across the United
Nations system will keep in view geographical,
cultural and ethnic factors. Adequate resources should
also be mobilized to that effect. The active
involvement of civil society and non-governmental
organizations is a sine qua non. We are of the View that
the role of the media in enhancing the integration of
women in peace processes is quite significant.

In conclusion, let me underline that ending
impunity is a must. However, it is more important -
indeed, crucial - to mobilize leadership, secure
accountability, pool adequate resources, identify
challenges and address root causes in protecting
women and girls in wartime, as well as in peacetime.

