Mr. Tupouniua (Tonga): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Pacific small island developing
States, comprising Fiji, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, the
Republic of the Marshall Islands, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country, the
Kingdom of Tonga.

I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your strong leadership in
convening this open debate. We share the concerns
raised in the presidential statement of October 2007
(S/PRST/2007/40), wherein the Security Council
condemned all acts of gender-based violence in
situations of armed conflict committed against women
and girls, including killing, maiming, and sexual
violence and abuse. We commend the work that
Security Council has done in addressing gender-based
violence with the adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and with the more recent adoption of resolutions 1468
(2003), 1493 (2003) and 1590 (2005).

Gender-based violence in situations of armed
conflict is a violation of women's basic human rights.
It is also a concern raised by the Secretary-General in
his report containing an in-depth study on all forms of
violence against women published in 2006
(A/61/122/Add.1). The report recognized that there are
many forms and manifestations of violence against
women in a wide range of settings, including the
family, the community, State custody and institutions,
armed conflict and refugee and internally displaced
persons situations. The Secretary-General emphasized
that

"violence constitutes a continuum across the
lifespan of women, it cuts across both the public
and the private sphere and one form of violence
often reinforces another." (A/6l/122/Add.l, para. 365)

What we are seeing in some parts of the world is
the use of rape and sexual assault as systematic war
tactics in destroying the cohesion of communities. In
some cases, women who were raped or sexually
assaulted during situations of armed conflict face
rejection by their families and communities. They are
often ostracized and left to fend for themselves. These
women face debilitating poverty and discrimination,
and many subsequently fall into the vicious cycle of
further exploitation and abuse by working in the sex
trade; many are exposed to the danger of human
trafficking.
In the light of women caught in situations of
armed conflict, we urge the Security Council to
recognize gender-based violence as a threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
recommend that, where appropriate, the Security
Council systematically monitor incidents of gender-
based violence in situations of armed conflict.
Furthermore, we recommend that, where appropriate,
the Secretary-General systematically include
comprehensive information on gender-based violence
in his reports on conflict-affected situations and that he
prepare a special report to the Security Council with
timely information on sexual and gender-based
violence, thereby initiating the process of follow-up for
the Security Council and United Nations agencies.

We congratulate the sponsoring countries for
taking the initiative to put forth today's draft
resolution, which reaffirms the important role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and peacebuilding and highlights the fact that violence,
intimidation and discrimination may erode women's
legitimacy and their capacity to participate in post-
conflict public life, reconciliation and post-conflict
peacebuilding processes.

In our efforts to support the victims of sexual and
gender-based violence, we must provide women with
psychological care to help them achieve long-term
stability.

I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
the importance of taking a preventive attitude towards
sexual and gender-based violence and other factors that
may endanger the security of women. Sexual and
gender-based violence does not occur in a vacuum.
Unfavourable political, social, cultural, economic and
environmental exerts pressure and therefore reinforce
existing vulnerabilities and gender inequalities.

It is important for the Security Council to address
cross-cutting issues such as climate change in relation
to women's security. Climate change is an emerging
cross-cutting issue with serious security implications.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in its
fourth assessment report, highlights the vulnerabilities
of developing countries and states that poor
communities are especially vulnerable due to limited
adaptive capacities and are more dependent on climate-
sensitive resources.

Women and children account for an estimated
70 per cent of the world's poorest population. Women

08-3908]
in developing countries are responsible for an
estimated 45 to 80 per cent of household food
production. Women are arguably much more dependent
upon agriculture for their livelihoods and survival.
Thus far, the effects of climate change are mostly
likely to erode women's capacity to provide for
themselves and their families, due to the loss of their
livelihoods.

It is important to recognize gender differences not
just in terms of differential vulnerability but also as
differential capacity to adapt and to mitigate the effects
of climate change. Climate change is not gender-
neutral; rather, gender is an important determinant in
climate change mitigation and adaptation. The lack of
provisions for integrating a gender perspective into
adaptation and mitigation strategies will seriously
threaten the security of women. Women need to be
empowered economically and must receive training
and capacity-building to better adapt to the effects of
climate change. It is also imperative to increase
grassroots assistance to women in their efforts to
preserve their livelihoods.

The link between climate change, the security of
women and gender-based violence in situations of
armed conflict is closer than one would expect. The
developing world is facing more exogenous threats and
risk factors than ever before. During the Food Security
Forum in April this year, the Food and Agriculture
Organization warned that long-term food insecurity
would lead to the chronic undernourishment of the
world's poor. An estimated 850 million people
worldwide suffer from hunger, and the number is likely
to increase by 4 million each year. Experts at the
Forum cautioned that without proper mitigation and
adaptation strategies and resources to implement such
strategies, many developing countries will see their
coping capacity diminish over time. The loss of arable
land, the increased frequency of natural disasters,
weakened infrastructure, increases in epidemic
diseases, population displacements, the increase in
poverty and competition for natural resources are
drivers of conflict.

Since nearly one third of the world's poorest
population live in countries that are fragile or conflict-
affected, they will also be the ones most likely to be
affected by or to engage in resource wars - armed
conflicts over the use of natural resources, including
oil, water and arable land. In a recent interview,
Antonio Guterres, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, reinforced the likelihood
of the situation as he explained that climate change
could also uproot people by provoking armed conflicts
over increasingly scarce resources.

Such conflicts will have a devastating impact on
developing countries, and it is very likely that women
will be exposed to physical and psychological harm
and sexual and gender-based violence. We therefore
urge the Security Council to take a preventive approach
in dealing with sexual and gender-based violence by
considering climate change as a threat to women's
security and to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

