Mrs. Andelie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for organizing this important debate, and we
welcome the valuable contribution of the Honourable
Foreign Secretary, Mr. Hague. I also thank the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, who visited Bosnia and Herzegovina
recently, as well as Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy
ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar from the Women's
Initiatives for Gender Justice for their statements.

Violence against women is certainly the most
brutal manifestation of discrimination, and we are
fully committed to addressing all forms of violence
against women and girls, including sexual violence in
conflict. The protection of women in conflict situations
and ending impunity remain our utmost priorities.
Sexual violence in armed conflict represents one of
the most serious forms of the violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Furthermore, impunity for sexual violence in conflict
is unacceptable and cannot be tolerated. Therefore, we
advocate recognition of the importance of women's
access to justice in conflict and post-conflict settings.
We also believe that more has to be done to address these
ongoing crimes, including by permanent opposition to
the traditional account that sexual Violence in armed
conflict is a cultural phenomenon, an unavoidable
consequence of war or a less important crime.

Bearing all this in mind, we fully support the work
of the United Nations in addressing sexual violence in
armed conflict, particularly the mandates of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and we continue to closely cooperate with them. We
acknowledge their active advocacy efforts, inter alia
with Governments, in order to address these horrible
crimes.

The Security Council's recognition ofthis matter as
a serious concern for international peace and security
is of great importance for building a solid framework
for preventing and addressing this gruesome tactic
of war. Therefore, the Council has a significant role
to play, in accordance with the relevant resolutions,
particularly in emphasizing the importance of national
and international authorities strengthening the rule
of law response. All appropriate mechanisms and
procedures for monitoring commitments by parties
in conflict should be supported by the Council. Also,
United Nations officials should be more engaged in
dialogue with States and other stakeholders who may
exert influence to elicit such commitments.

At this point, I would like to elaborate on the
achievements of my country in this regard.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is committed to promoting
the role of women in peace and security through the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions. To illustrate our genuine commitment
in this regard, we need to point out that Bosnia and
Herzegovina was the first country in South-East
Europe to adopt an action plan aimed at implementation
of the aforementioned resolution. The plan was used as
sample document for other countries of the region that
drafted similar action plans. In addition, my country
has also adopted a gender action plan and enacted laws
regulating the prevention of violence against women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Involving women in conflict prevention and
mediation and deploying women's protection advisers
to United Nations peacekeeping and special political
missions is crucial to building and reinforcing peace.
We believe that women should play a greater role as
legitimate partners in international and national efforts
to maintain peace and security, which is fundamental
for more effective performance on the ground.
Recruiting women in the civil, military and police
components of peacekeeping missions can encourage
local women to report incidents of sexual violence and
contribute to establishing better communication with
local communities. We spare no effort in advancing
this issue and, as result of our commitment the relevant
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have adopted
a policy that one-third of candidates nominated for
peacekeeping missions must be women.

We are aware of the fact that national Governments
bear the primary legal and moral responsibility for the
protection of civilian populations. In this regard, and
with the aim of improving the overall situation of women
who are victims of rape, we are undertaking efforts to
finalize the drafting of a document entitled "Programme
for victims of rape, sexual abuse and torture in Bosnia
and Herzegovina for the period 2013-2016", which will
seek to improve the position of all victims. One of the
goals of the programme emphasizes the obligation of
the State to provide access to reparations programmes
for victims of war and the need to provide legal and
psychological support to victims and/or witnesses in
court proceedings and after them.

We recognize the positive steps in holding
perpetrators to account at all levels. However, we
believe that greater efforts need to be undertaken in this
regard, including through the work of the International
Criminal Court, the ad hoc tribunals and the national
tribunals.

Finally, we would like to point out that the
international community must continue to work on
strengthening United Nations efforts to address sexual
Violence in armed conflict, and Bosnia and Herzegovina
stands ready to contribute to those efforts.

