Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): 1 thank the French
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today's open debate. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their remarks and to acknowledge the
contributions by the Executive Director of UN-Women
and other representatives.

As we mark the seventeenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it presents
an opportunity to reflect on our achievements and
challenges in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. The issues of the different
impact that armed conflict has on women and girls and
their exclusion from conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping continue to be critical aspects of the
work that we still have ahead of us in that regard, at
both the international and domestic levels.

There is undoubtedly an indissoluble link between
gender inequality and international peace and security.
Indeed, finding ways to increase women's inclusion
in peacekeeping and end the problem of sexual abuse
and exploitation have been two of the most challenging
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda.
Despite several Council resolutions, including
resolution 2106 (2013), which encouraged troop- and
police-contributing countries to increase the number
of women recruited and deployed in peace operations,
and resolution 2272 (2016), of March 2016, which
explicitly tackled sexual exploitation and abuse, a
holistic transformative culture remains largely absent.
In that regard, we are pleased to announce that Sri
Lanka has taken the initiative - together with the
participation of the Permanent Mission of Canada,
the International Civil Society Action Network and
the Association of War Affected Women - to co-host
a side event at the United Nations on 31 October on
ending sexual exploitation and abuse and increasing the
numbers of women in peacekeeping, in order to mark
the seventeenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
We invite everyone here to attend this interactive
discussion so that we can raise greater awareness and
work together to better serve our communities.

Sri Lanka has demonstrated its wholehearted
commitment to the elimination of sexual exploitation
and abuse. We were one ofthe first countries to sign the
Secretary-General's voluntary compact on preventing
and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse. Our
President, His Excellency Mr. Maithripala Sirisena,
has joined the Secretary-General's Circle of Leadership
on preventing and responding to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations, and we have
made contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund
in support of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.

Historically, Sri Lanka has made strides in the
area of women's empowerment. We adopted a women's
charter two years before the Beijing Platform for
Action, and we already have in place a national plan of
action on women. But we know that more remains to be
done. Sri Lanka takes the responsibility of promoting
and protecting the rights of women very seriously,
including preventing conflict-related sexual violence
and sexual exploitation and abuse as an urgent priority.

Sri Lanka's long-drawn-out conflict has resulted
in a large number of victims, including orphans, war
widows, single mothers and female-headed households.
We are committed to addressing their immediate
concerns and making them participants in all areas of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. This will continue to
be a priority in our post-conflict peacebuilding efforts.

Successful peacebuilding means working
to ensure that gender equality and women's
empowerment - including economic empowerment,
human security, human rights and development - mesh
together. It is also vital that we engage domestic
actors, from the grassroots to the highest echelons of
Government, in ensuring ownership of peacebuilding
processes and guaranteeing long-term sustainability.
In all those endeavours, we are committed to including
women as essential participants in the conversation. In a
reflection of Sri Lanka's commitments, and as we tread
the path of reconciliation and transformative justice,
my Government has appointed an ll-member task force
of eminent persons to hold nationwide consultations
on reconciliation measures. The members of the task
force are entirely drawn from civil society and include
six women. However, all this can be done only by
acknowledging the existence of institutionalized
structural gender bias, identifying the associated
problems and sincerely seeking solutions to them.
Sri Lanka has been making modest contributions
to United Nations peacekeeping efforts for more than
five decades. We are equally committed to including
our highly trained and disciplined women forces in
our peacekeeping efforts. Furthermore, as Sri Lanka
proceeds in its reconciliation and peacebuilding
process, with the active participation of women at all
levels, we will continue to share our experiences and
practices, especially in relation to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.

