Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I am pleased that you have taken the
initiative of holding this open debate on women and
peace and security and that you have focused it on the
issue of the violence besetting women in armed
conflicts. Copies of my detailed statement are available
in the Chamber.

After fully associating my delegation with the
statement to be made shortly by the Dutch presidency
of the European Union, I should merely like here to
emphasize three points related to follow-up on
resolution 1325 (2000) and to make some suggestions.
I shall begin with the points.

First, it is certainly important to ensure the
quality of the thematic and country reports that are
submitted to the Council by the Secretary-General. In
that regard, I note the commitment made by the
Secretary-General in the report to make sure that such
reports do not overlook that issue. We are well aware
that technical constraints limit the volume of reports.
Therefore, we should probably think about how the
Council could best obtain more precise elements in a
way yet to be defined. My delegation would favour the
holding, on a periodic basis and in the appropriate
format, of meetings of Council members on that
subject - probably at the expert level, with advisers
on parity issues. That issue could be discussed.

My second point concerns the gender-specific
content of mandates. France, for its part, is committed
to ensuring that the mandates of peacekeeping
operations systematically include a gender-based
aspect and aim specifically at resolution 1325 (2000). I
might mention that the mandates envisaged for the
operations in Cote d'Ivoire and Burundi - a recent
initiative on the part of my country - contain many
references to the situation of women and actions taken
by women in those countries. I would add that, in the
draft resolution France is introducing on children and
armed conflict, we made sure to specifically address
the issue of girl soldiers, which is too often absent
from programmes of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation. As I pledged last year,
we will spare no effort in that regard.

My third point relates to Council missions on the
ground. In the days to come, we will carry out another
Security Council mission in the Great Lakes region,
which my delegation is preparing. On that occasion, we
plan to make contact, as we did last year, with
women's associations. I recall that we made such
contacts in Bunia and Bujumbura last year. In that
regard, this Council mission must also examine how
United Nations operations carry out their mandates and
manage to work at both the national and the regional
levels. But I would like to conclude these remarks by
congratulating Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno and, through
him, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, on
all their efforts over the past two years.

I listened most attentively to the statements of

Ms. Arbour and Ms. Obaid on violence against women
in conflict situations. Such violence is appalling. In the
past few months, the Council's attention has been
drawn to several situations in which such violence has
been particularly grave - in Ituri, Kivu, Burundi and,
of course, Darfur.

We certainly have the same concern: how can
such tragedies be prevented? Undoubtedly, there are
several courses of action. My country has always
believed that we clearly have not given enough
attention to the warning signs of gender-based
violence. The Secretary-General was quite right to
point out our collective failure to prevent such
violence. We are convinced that a society that lowers
its vigilance or ignores problems of violence in times
of peace will expose itself to the worst atrocities in
periods of crisis. We therefore must redouble our
efforts to better assess the scope and nature of such
violence in peacetime. That is why France, for the year
2004, will make a financial contribution to the study on
all forms violence against women that the General
Assembly requested from the Secretary-General for its
sixtieth session, in 2005.

Secondly, when such disturbing information is
communicated to us, we must act more effectively, We
believe that that depends on the swift deployment of
human rights observers, who can report such violence
but also provide technical assistance to the local
authorities to put an end to such atrocities. In that
regard, we welcome Ms. Arbour's announcement that a
rapid reaction team will soon be established in Geneva.
It is also essential that such crimes be brought to the
Council's attention so that it can act appropriately. We
believe that having the Council hear reports by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
is very valuable in that regard.

Thirdly and finally, we are confronted by the
issue of impunity. We must ensure that the guilty are
punished and that the victims receive protection and
compensation. That is an important task. The Council
often addresses this issue and furthermore is
confronted by it quite frequently. We believe that we
must strengthen the means to combat impunity at all
levels - ministries of justice and of the interior,
prisons, prosecutors, judges, attorneys - in the
countries or situations where it is found.

But the United Nations must also set an example.
Whenever it seems possible and desirable, the
Organization must provide assistance to national
jurisdictions. Aside from that, the Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda have done pioneering
work in their jurisprudence on gender-based crimes,
even if the hearings have not always focused enough
on that aspect. In any case, we are also pleased to see
more women judges on the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. Lastly, obviously there is also the International
Criminal Court. Its recent decisions to open hearings
on crimes under its competence committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Uganda are
clearly major developments in the fight against
impunity in those countries.

I cannot conclude my statement without paying
tribute to the action taken by civil society to promote
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I am
pleased that one of its representatives was invited to
contribute to our debate. My delegation invites non-
governmental organizations to continue to prompt the
Council so that resolution 1325 (2000) will inspire still
more of our work.
