Ms. Jarbussynova: I wish to express my deep
gratitude to the United Kingdom's presidency of the
Security Council for convening this timely high-
level debate.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), as a comprehensive Euro-Atlantic
and Eurasian regional organization, sets the promotion
and protection of human rights at the core of any viable
security strategy. The OSCE pays considerable attention
to the perilous links between crisis situations and the
risks of trafficking. I wish, therefore, to concentrate
today on the nexus between emergencies and human
exploitation in the OSCE region and on much needed
risk-mitigation and counter-trafficking programmes.

In 2016, my Office compiled a survey of selected
aspects of the OSCE action plan against trafficking in
persons, so as to better understand developments and
challenges in their implementation. Although the data
show some progress across the areas of prevention,
prosecution and protection, they also reveal that
considerable work remains to be done. That becomes
all the more urgent if one considers the latest trends in
the trafficking in human beings.

As immigration policies tighten, migration routes
become longer and more hazardous. People on the move,
especially women and children, are particularly at risk
of falling into the hands of human traffickers. Very
often what begins as a humanitarian crisis swiftly grows
into a security crisis. The task facing us is formidable.
Of the more than 1 million irregular migrants who
surged into Europe in 2015, more than 90 per cent used
services provided by 40,000 individuals operating in
loose criminal networks and who continue to often
exploit irregular migrants after arrival. Since 2014,
more than 1.7 million internally displaced persons in
Ukraine have been forced to leave their homes. How
can we counteract that and meaningfully address the
magnitude of those transnational challenges? How can
we remedy the fact that, all too often, criminal networks
flourish, perpetrators go unpunished, the level of
convictions remains low worldwide and victims fail to
be compensated for their material and moral damages?
I believe that national efforts, however effective, cannot
fully tackle the complexity of this crime. In the spirit
in which Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations was forged, it is imperative that diverse actors
and first responders engage in multidisciplinary, cross-
sectoral and transnational efforts, wherein inclusion,
collaboration and the sharing of best practices
become watchwords in our combined endeavours
towards ensuring more effective investigations, timely
prosecutions and the prompt identification of victims.

Given the leverage of the OSCE and its
multidimensional approach, my team and I have
striven, since the onset of both the migration crisis and,
indeed, the deterioration of the situation in Ukraine, to
counter the accompanying exploitation of human life
by traffickers. It therefore gives me great pride to have
piloted the OSCE project entitled Combating Human
Trafficking along Migration Routes, in which we are
training law-enforcement officials, prosecutors, labour
inspectors, financial investigators and civil society
representatives in an intensive simulation exercise. In
that endeavour, I am extremely proud of our efficient
cooperation with the United Nations family, the Office
ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Organization for Migration, as well as the
European Police Office and INTERPOL. Likewise, I
remain committed to imparting best practices to the staff
of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
on how to monitor and report trafficking-related trends
in the context of a conflict situation. Such action is
imperative given that, despite the seriousness of those
crimes, human trafficking in the context of crisis-
driven situations continues to go largely unnoticed by
both governmental and non-governmental actors.

I sincerely hope that we at the OSCE can capitalize
on those achievements in the upcoming regional
consultations for a global compact for safe, orderly and

regular migration, thereby ensuring a human rights-
centred approach.
Further guiding our work is the conviction that it
is important to investigate the link between terrorism
and trafficking. To that end, we are supporting a group
of experts who are addressing that issue with a special
focus on youth trafficked for terrorism.

We also recognize that it is important to take
advantage of the collective purchasing power of
Governments to eliminate the market for goods and
services produced by trafficking labour. The second
of our flagship projects in that regard seeks to prevent
trafficking in human beings in supply chains through
Government procurement and measures. To that end,
I commend the Government of the United Kingdom
for supporting our efforts in encouraging consumers,
campaigners and investors to scrutinize businesses so
as to end modern-day slavery.

Finally, given that children and unaccompanied
minors are particularly vulnerable to violence and
exploitation, next month's seventeenth high-level
Conference of the Alliance against Trafficking in
Persons, to be held in Vienna, will focus on child
trafficking. Given that almost one in five trafficking
victims across the OSCE region is a child, the aim of
the two-day conference is to enhance the coherence of
international efforts and to develop more integrated,
effective and expert recommendations to adequately
respond to child trafficking in a manner that respects
human rights.

We owe that to children, but also to men and
women everywhere, regardless of age, status, origin or,
indeed, whether they are fleeing crisis or not. Despite
the scale and breadth of the challenges that we face, I
am convinced that close cooperation with international
and local partners will allow us to make a significant
contribution to highlighting and mitigating the scourge
of human trafficking.

