Mr. Winid (Poland): Let me thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's debate. I also thank
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Hamsatu Allamin of Nigeria for their statements.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to add some
comments in my national capacity.

Poland attaches great importance to the topic of
today's debate. On Monday, 13 April, the President of
Poland, Bronislaw Komorowski, ratified the Council
of Europe Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic violence, which
was adopted in Istanbul in 2011. I subscribe to the
comment made earlier by the representative of Nepal
on the role of women in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and in that regard I would like to
congratulate Ethiopia, South Africa and Ghana on
having the highest percentage of women peacekeepers.
I would also like to express our respect to Jamaica and
other Caribbean Community States for the prominent
role they played in commemorating the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and
the Transatlantic Slave Trade, with this year's thematic
focus on women and slavery. We also commend the
Department of Public Information for the exhibit at
United Nations Headquarters, entitled "Women and
slavery", which was part of the Remember Slavery
Programme.

In the past, Poland was a Victim of many foreign
aggressions and suffered the consequences of violent
conflict. In that respect, I would like to highlight the
role of the heroic women who led with vision, dedication
and courage, and stood up against aggression. One
example of such a woman comes from the history of my
own country, as well as that of a country rather far away
from Poland - the island of Tonga. Queen Salote of
Tonga was the first foreign leader to officially oppose
the German invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939.
She and her action are a great example for us even now
in the twenty-first century.

Nowadays, women continue to be the Victims of
conflict-related sexual Violence across the world. The
widespread occurrence of sexual violence in conflict is
a threat to peace and security, and diminishes prospects
for reconciliation and peacebuilding. Combating
impunity and providing support for the Victims are
concrete duties that we must assume with respect to
those who have suffered from sexual violence. We shall
support the judiciary at the national and international
levels, as well as those affected, through the Trust Fund
for Victims, to which Poland is a proud contributor.

Although international organizations play a pivotal

role in combating sexual violence in conflict, the
primary responsibility to protect their nationals lies
with States. In that context, the grass-roots approach is a
must, and that includes changing behaviour patterns and
teaching their citizens what is not acceptable under any
circumstances. Unfortunately, in many countries there
is resistance among victims with regard to reporting a
crime due to the potential social stigma. Furthermore,
a citizen must have confidence that the perpetrators of
such acts will be held accountable by State authorities
and, ifnecessary, that they will face consequences at the
international level - namely, before the International
Criminal Court. The International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda have played a historic role in the
prosecution of wartime sexual violence.

As my colleague from the delegation of the
European Union underlined earlier, we welcome the
entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). I
appeal to all members of the Security Council to ratify
this treaty. Without their support, the ATT will not have
the impact it should have.

In conclusion, yesterday, 14 April, marked the
first year since the abduction of Nigerian schoolgirls
by Boko Haram. Despite the efforts of the national
authorities and the international community, the fate of
most of the girls remains unknown. That terrible crime,
as well as others that we have witnessed in conflict-
affected areas in Africa or the Middle East, call for our
immediate action. We cannot leave them unpunished.

