Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica): It is an honour for
Costa Rica to speak today in its capacity as Chair of
the Human Security Network. The Network is a cross-
regional group of countries that includes Austria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland and Thailand, as
well as South Africa as an observer. On behalf of the
members, I would like to express our appreciation to
the Republic of Uganda for convening this important
ministerial-level open debate on women and peace and
security, which is a priority issue for the Network, and
thank Executive Director of UN Women, Michelle
Bachelet, for her presentation of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/498), marking the progress
we have made and highlighting the challenges we
continue to face in implementing Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000).

Today, we are commemorating the tenth
anniversary of that resolution, which recognized the
important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, as well as in peacebuilding, and
opened a new path in the protection of women's full
enjoyment of all human rights in armed conflicts and in
the efforts to strengthen the participation and
representation of women in peace and security
processes.

It is evident that this landmark resolution has
greatly contributed to an increased political focus on
the area of women and peace and security. Over the
years, the Council has remained active in this area
through the adoption of resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and, most recently, resolution 1894 (2009).
With resolution 1888 (2009) the Council established
the mandate of a Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We welcome the appointment of
Margot Wallstrom to that important position. Together
those resolutions form the basis of the United Nations
policy framework on women and peace and security,
and guide Member States, United Nations entities and
civil society. We also welcome the recent creation of
UN Women. With its central focus on supporting the
attainment of gender equality and the empowerment of
women in all aspects and in all situations, this new
entity will make a crucial contribution to meeting the
needs of women and girls worldwide and will
accelerate progress in further advancing the women
and peace and security agenda. We welcome the
appointment of Michelle Bachelet as head of the new
entity, and we look forward to cooperating with UN
Women, both here in New York as well as in the field.

However, despite the progress of the past ten
years, many challenges remain. The abhorrent
conditions that women and girls have faced in armed
conflict situations persist and effective, and
comprehensive methods for addressing those realities
are still lacking. As we speak in this Chamber,
discrimination and Violence against women in conflict
and post-conflict situations, often seemingly
committed with complete impunity, are still rampant in
certain areas of the world. The horror of such gender-
based violence, particularly rape and other forms of
sexual abuse, continues to be brought to the attention
of the Security Council, and efforts to prevent such
crimes, including through peacekeeping missions, and
to fight impunity have to be redoubled. Let us not
forget the statement delivered by Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, in the
Fourth Committee of the General Assembly just days
ago, stipulating that widespread or systematic use of
sexual violence against civilians in armed conflicts is
used as a tactic of war. That is indeed a very disturbing
fact of today's reality.

An urgent and effective response from the
international community is required. There must be
clear objectives, starting with ending impunity,
empowering women, rejecting various forms of
discrimination, mobilizing political leadership and
increasing awareness of rape as a tactic and
consequence of armed conflict. In addition, greater
coherence and a more systematic response by the
United Nations system and increased consultation and
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, Member States and civil society are vital
to the success of such action.

With regard to impunity, we should recognize the
essential role of international criminal justice, and
particularly of the International Criminal Court, in
addressing cases of sexual violence in armed conflict.
The Rome Statute, in itself a major achievement,
recognizes sexual violence as a potential war crime and
crime against humanity. Now, the Court is examining
situations involving sexual violence, which
demonstrates the central contribution that international
criminal justice can and does make in dealing with
sexual violence in armed conflict.

The widespread or systematic use of violence
against women in armed conflicts is a security issue as
well as, of course, a human rights issue. It affects a
whole society, significantly exacerbates situations of
armed conflict and may impede the restoration of
international peace and security. As has recently been
reaffirmed by the Council in a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/20), the Peacebuilding Commission
plays an important role in promoting and supporting an
integrated and coherent approach to peacebuilding,
including women's participation.

Women play a pivotal role in the economic
recovery of post-conflict countries. The PBC has
committed to working on this issue as part of its
broader efforts to promote and address women's
post-conflict needs. But this fact must also be
recognized at the political level by increasing women's
participation in political posts, whether appointed or
elected; by systematically ensuring the full and equal
involvement of women in peace negotiations; and by
taking into account women's needs in peace
agreements.

Furthermore, education is a fundamental
requirement for eliminating violence against women in
armed conflict, and in this respect civil society has a
key role to play in the peacekeeping and peacebuilding
processes. The issue of violence against women in
armed conflict is closely related to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which is a priority of the
Human Security Network. Both the protection of
civilians and the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000)
should be fully incorporated into the mandates of all
peacekeeping operations.

All Member States have a responsibility to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). The development of
national action plans is a key component of Member
States' commitment to fulfilling that responsibility, and
the coming decade should aim for action and
accountability.

Women's full enjoyment of all human rights has
been at the heart of the Human Security Network since
its inception. We are committed to supporting
meaningful steps to promote and enhance the role of
women in peace processes. Without women's
participation in this area, sustainable peace will not be
possible. Women must be an integral part of all our
thinking on peace and security. We look to the Security
Council for strong leadership in the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
related resolutions.

