Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Bolivia for its
initiative to organize this open debate on women and
peace and security.

Romania aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union. I would now like to make
some remarks in my national capacity.

This year, the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to
two people for their efforts to stop the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war. The tireless efforts of
Nadia Murad and Denis Mukwege to raise awareness
and counter the abominable practices carried out
against women and girls affected by conflict must be a
source of inspiration for all of us - first in identifying
and holding accountable the perpetrators of those acts;
then in seeking justice, retribution and psychosocial
support for victims; and, finally, in allowing survivors
to testify against the harmful practices of which they
were victims.

In that context, we are deeply concerned about the
intimidation of, and reprisals against, women peace
activists and humanitarian activists. Their experience
and fears should not be silenced, but rather expressed
and considered in decision-making processes. In that
regard, integration, non-discrimination and gender
parity play a vital role in peace and security strategies.
Greater visibility in the public arena for those women
is long overdue. Listening to them and enabling them
to engage in efforts to build and maintain peace and to
prevent or minimize conflict is the right approach to
achieve lasting solutions.

Women and girls are disproportionately affected
by armed conflict and its long-term consequences.
Safeguarding their human rights, ensuring that they
are protected from sexual violence, exploitation and
trafficking is a common refrain. But to turn those words
into an everyday reality around the world, we need to
increase the participation, leadership and presence of
women and girls in decision-making processes.

The participation ofwomen officers inpeacekeeping
operations is critical to their operational effectiveness
and has a direct impact on the sustainability of peace.
In 2018 more than 11,000 police officers were deployed
in 15 United Nations missions, of whom only 11 per
cent are women. Reaching the 20 per cent goal by
2020 is a major challenge for the United Nations.
Those numbers reflect the magnitude of the challenge.
Currently, female Romanian officers account for 13 per
cent of its staff in the police contingents deployed in
peacekeeping operations.

As a candidate country for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council for the period 2020-2021,
Romania renews its strong commitment to enhancing
the participation of women in peacekeeping missions
under the banner of the United Nations.
For many reasons, women are at the heart of
peacebuilding processes. The rebuilding of societies and
economies affected by armed conflict relies heavily on
women's contributions. That translates into their need
to have better access to education and information,
employment, financial services and markets, and the
need for them to participate in the political debate.
Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to provide them
with better institutional, financial and legal support,
as well as access to resources and technology, in order
to leverage their tenacity, energy and adaptability. The
time has come.

