The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me begin
by thanking the President of the Security Council
for convening today's meeting on women and peace
and security in the Sahel, as well as for Sweden's
leadership on this issue during the country's time in the
Security Council.

Yesterday I returned from a joint United Nations-
African Union mission to three countries - South
Sudan, the Niger and Chad. That mission was the
second of its kind, following last year's high-level visit
to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
When I reported back to the Security Council at that time
(see S/PV.8022) - marking the first time the Security
Council heard a briefing on women and peace and
security in relation to a country situation - members
of the Council requested further trips of this nature, a
request that I am pleased to report we took forward. I
would like to thank the people and the Governments of
South Sudan, Chad and the Niger.

We were joined in the Niger and Chad by Foreign
Minister Wallstrom in her capacity as President of
the Security Council for July. At various points on
the trip, we were also joined by senior United Nations
colleagues, including the Executive Directors of UN-
Women and the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and his Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, and
representatives of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and the Sustainable Energy for All
initiative. We were also joined by the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Sahel and the Special Adviser on the
Sahel. I was very proud to lead a delegation in which
women made up the majority.

Our purpose was to highlight issues of women
and peace and security and development. Throughout
the trip, we met with women civil society leaders,
community representatives and religious and traditional
chiefs. We visited many development projects, and then
met with local authorities, senior Government officials
and Heads of State to discuss the key challenges and
opportunities that exist and to convey the voices and
messages that we had heard from women. Four issues
resonated most dramatically.

The first was the need to address the stark cost that
women and girls pay for conflict. That was particularly
evident in South Sudan, where we visited women in
protection-of-civilian sites who spoke of the violence
they face both inside and outside the camps. It was
also borne out in the stories of women in rural areas of
Chad, where the impact of Boko Haram has resulted in
insecurity, loss of family members and the increased
use of female suicide bombers.

Secondly, we heard a universal and increasingly
frustrated call by women for greater inclusion,
representation and participation in all areas of society.
They demand greater participation in decision-making.
In Juba in South Sudan, in Addis Ababa and in
Khartoum they asked that their voices be heard in the
peace process. In Chad and the Niger they advocated
for the implementation of legislation on a quota for
political participation and the recognition of their role
in the economy and in preventing violent extremism.

Greater representation at the community level is
a further imperative. The women religious leaders we
met in Chad are a very powerful voice against gender
inequality and against the attacks on women's rights
that are such a core part of terrorist groups' strategy
and identity. By teaching the Qur'an, they are sending a
message that the Qur'an and Islam are for both men and
women and that Islam is a religion of peace.

Women are also seeking greater inclusion in the
economy. In the B01 region of the Lake Chad basin
we saw the multiple roles fisherwomen were playing
in maintaining livelihoods in the absence of men who
had been killed and in building community resilience
in the face of environmental degradation and insecurity
caused by the Boko Haram insurgency. Such models,
if scaled up, have the potential to generate economic
dividends for the country. We reminded leaders that
inclusion is not a woman's issue; it is, rather, a whole-of-
society issue.

Thirdly, there is a clear need to keep countries
experiencing fragility today from becoming failed
States tomorrow. Chad and the Niger are dealing
with challenges that are largely not of their making,
including insecurity that originated beyond their
borders and climate change, which respects no borders
at all. Despite their own constraints, they are among
the world's most generous hosts of refugees. But the
impact on their economies and development aspirations
has been profound. The President of the Niger, for
example, presented to us his renaissance plan to meet
the basic needs of the country's population, but it has
been hampered by the fall in uranium and oil prices
and the expenditures on security. Security therefore
comes at a price; all too often it comes at the expense
of development.

In that context, it is critical that we all step up,
which means urgently increasing our budget support
for development in those and other fragile countries.
It is a matter, first and foremost, of human dignity. But
it is also a matter of peace and security. Investment in
development must be transformative: it must support
scaled-up, integrated projects such as we saw in the
Niger when we visited the United Nations programme
that brought together health, nutrition, agriculture,
water and sanitation, alongside women's empowerment,
recognizing the context of climate change. I am
confident that the reforms that we are pursuing in the
United Nations will provide the necessary space to
scale up such interventions.

With today's conflicts being greater in both number
and complexity, it is more important than ever to find
the path to peacebuilding and sustainable development
for all. Across the three countries we visited, it is evident
that women can be the agents of a new and necessary
approach - a new narrative, a new paradigm.

We sensed during our visit an increasingly pressing
need to operationalize the policies, frameworks and
agendas that we have in place. For 18 years, the Security
Council has discussed the agenda item of women and
peace and security in annual thematic debates. Once a
year we assert that gender equality is foundational to
stability and peace. But rarely have we moved beyond
the principles. We believe that now is the time to move
from frameworks to action. Investing in peace now in
this region will bring lasting global dividends for all.

With resolution 1325 (2000) and the seven
resolutions that build on it we have the necessary
commitments. We have tools such as a recalibrated
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We
must now bring these tools and commitments to life,
while encouraging further alignment among the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, Agenda 2063 and, most
important, national plans.

The cost of inaction is high. Poverty, weak
institutions and gender inequality, including the
abhorrent practices such as child marriage, are creating
an environment ripe for extremism. I thank members of
the Council again for supporting such joint missions,
which we believe contribute greatly to advancing the
work of the Council. We look forward to working
together to draw the appropriate lessons towards
building lives of peace, security and equality for all.

