The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the presidency of Bolivia for give me the opportunity
to address the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda through the political and economic
empowerment of women. I congratulate the Council
on its efforts this past year to increase the number of
speakers from civil society, for the work of its group
of experts on women and peace and security, and to
achieve parity between genders and guarantee the
gender perspective among the speakers during the
presidencies of some of its members.
(spoke in French)

Never, over the past 30 years, has the number of
countries in the grip of some form of violent conflict
been so high. Forced displacements due to wars and
persecution are more numerous than never. Climate
change and underdevelopment are increasingly
threatening to our security, while the question of
human rights has been relegated to the background.
There is every reason to worry, but we must resist the
ambient pessimism and not lose sight of the fact that
solutions exist. Hope has always guided our steps in
the action we collectively take on behalf of women
and peace and security. This is in issue that promises
change, which includes many elements we need to
address the complex challenges the world is facing:
climate change, disarmament, equality and inclusion. It
is also a fundamental question in terms of reaching our
main goal of preventing conflict and human suffering.

(spoke in English)

Over the past year, we have seen positive examples
ofprogress. Women's organizations continue to have an
impact, from keeping dialogue alive in Guinea Bissau
to rebuilding communities in Colombia. In the Central
African Republic and Mali, women successfully
contributed to negotiating between armed actors to
halt the escalation of intercommunal tensions. In the
Syrian Arab Republic, women have negotiated local
ceasefires, mediated the creation of civilian safe zones
and coordinated humanitarian and relief initiatives;
they have done similarly in Yemen.

I can personally attest to the critical importance of
the work done by the women peacemakers I have met
around the world, from Mali to Bangladesh. Here at the
United Nations, the Women's Peace and Humanitarian
Fund is channeling resources to women's organizations
that need them. The Peacebuilding Fund invests more
than 30 per cent of its resources in gender equality
programming, and a growing number of donors are
earmarking funds for gender equality.

We are placing this agenda at the heart of our
partnerships with regional organizations. The Deputy
Secretary-General has made several high-level
missions with the African Union, focused on women,
peace and security and development. Last month, the
Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Dr. Denis Mukwege
and Ms. Nadia Murad, two champions of women, peace
and security who exemplify the power of individuals
to make a difference and the fact that survivors and
advocates are best placed to determine the changes
needed to build sustainable peace.

But despite this progress in some areas, the facts
on the ground show that we still have far to go. The
participation of women in formal peace processes
remains extremely limited. Between 1990 and 2017,
women constituted just 2 per cent of mediators, 8 per
cent of negotiators and 5 per cent of witnesses and
signatories in all major peace processes. Conflict
continues to have a devastating effect on women and
girls. The United Nations documented more than 800
cases of conflict-related sexual violence in 2017 - a
56 per cent increase since 2016.

Women human rights defenders, political leaders,
journalists and activists, who play an important role
in addressing the root causes of conflict, are targeted
at alarming rates. Women's marginalization, lack of
access to health and education services, and economic
disempowerment continue to be both a cause and an
effect of conflict. Funding for programmes to promote
gender equality and the empowerment of women in
countries affected by conflict is just 5 per cent of total
bilateral aid to such countries.

The evidence linking gender equality and peace
was recently set out in our joint study with the World
Bank, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to
Preventing Violent Conflict. It is convincing and well-
known. Maybe that is why the list of speakers for this
debate is so long every year In 2015, the open debate
on this item had the highest number of speakers in the
history of the Security Council (see S/PV.7533).

But there is a significant gap between what we
say in this Chamber and what we do outside it. Every
year, we make laudable commitments, but they are
not backed with the requisite financial and political
support. We repeat statistics about the sustainability
of inclusive peace processes, but that is not how we
mediate most conflicts. We extol the positive influence
of women peacebuilders, but provide little space
for their participation. We rely heavily on women's
organizations, but do not fund them adequately. We
recognize the importance of gender analysis, but out the
budgets for such expertise. To address this gap, I intend
to prioritize several action points in the coming year.

First, gender parity has the greatest potential
impact on effectiveness and credibility in our field
operations. But this is where the numbers are lowest,
and the rate of change is slowest. Women now comprise
41 per cent of heads and deputy heads of our peace
operations - more than ever before. Their differing
perspectives are already having a positive impact,
but the number of women in peace operations overall
has stagnated. Without decisive action, they will go
backwards as some missions are downsized. I have
therefore formed a working group to put emergency
measures in place to address this issue. Some elements
will need approval from Member States, and I hope the
commitment of the participants in this Chamber today
will be reflected in their support for these reforms when
we seize the General Assembly to change some of our
rules and regulations.

It is also crippling to our credibility and
protection-capacity that women represent only 4 per
cent of our military peacekeepers and 10 per cent
of police. The United Nations fully supports the
innovative efforts launched by Member States this year
to incentivize greater representation.

I remain committed to ending all forms of sexual
exploitation and abuse within the United Nations - one
of the first initiatives I took when I assumed office. I
will continue to work with my Special Coordinator
on Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse, the Victims' Rights Advocate
and Member States on this issue. I am pleased that
nearly 100 Member States have now signed voluntary
compacts with us to tackle sexual exploitation and
abuse, and I call on others to join them. The Circle
of Leadership of Heads of State and Government is
committed to zero tolerance, to preventing and ending
this scourge and to addressing its impact effectively
and humanely.

Secondly, with respect to mediation, we know
that the meaningful participation of women is directly
linked to more sustainable peace. And yet we continue
to support and lead processes that are not inclusive.
The establishment of several women's networks in
recent years is an important trend, as they can play
a role in influencing processes for the better. I am
pleased that members of my High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation - which is gender-balanced to
the level of full parity - are here this week to work
with representatives of these networks. Women's
participation should not be confined to advisory roles
or parallel structures, and I welcome the growing sense
of urgency from Member States, civil society and others
to ensure that we are designing more effective peace
processes with much stronger women's participation.

Thirdly, a gendered approach to peace and security
means supporting peacebuilding at the local level, even
during conflict. As peace processes falter at the national
and international level, we must consistently support
the local women's groups that negotiate humanitarian
access and support community resilience, learn from
them and build peace from the ground up.

Fourthly, financing this agenda is critical, and
the United Nations intends to lead by example. I have
created a high-level task force to review our funding
on gender equality, including in the peace and security
pillar. I will hold United Nations entities accountable
with respect to their commitments to increasing
spending on women and peace and security, with a
target of reaching or exceeding 15 per cent by 2020.

Finally, from now on I will include gender analysis
in my reports to the Security Council whenever it is
relevant to inform its decisions.

In two years' time, we will mark the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the fifth
anniversary of the global agreement giving rise to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration.
Gender equality and women's participation are a
unifying thread running through the implementation of
these landmark agreements for human rights, sustainable
development, and peace and security. In preparation for
these landmark dates, my report on women and peace
and security next year will include an assessment of
implementation of the relevant recommendations in the
three peace and security reviews undertaken in 2015,
particularly the Global Study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), together with resolution
2242 (2015), adopted three years ago. The findings
and recommendations from this assessment will be
the basis for increased efforts in the year leading up
to 2020. I encourage Member States to initiate similar
preparations and reviews.

As we look forward, I urge the Security Council to
invest in gender equality and women's empowerment,
not only as an end in themselves, but as a critical means
of achieving our overarching aim of preventing and
ending conflict and building peace and prosperity in
the world for all.

