Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We align ourselves with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

We welcome today's open debate and thank the
briefers for their interventions. We are pleased to see
the continuous engagement of the Security Council
in addressing sexual violence in conflict and the
wider women and peace and security agenda, 10 years
after the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
also commend the initiative and efforts of the German
presidency that led today to the adoption of resolution
2467 (2019). It represents indeed a further step in
countering the scourge of sexual violence in conflict,
although, like other Member States, we regret that it
was not possible to agree on a more comprehensive and
ambitious text.

The issue under discussion today represents a
top priority for Italy. In 2017, it was at the core of our
mandate on the Security Council and of our presidency
of the Group of Seven, and we are committed to
devoting our utmost attention to it as we plan further
initiatives in View of the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000).

The picture emerging from the 2019 report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/280) is, unfortunately,
still gloomy. Sexual-related crimes continue to be
used as part of a global war strategy by State and
non-State actors, and States continue to face setbacks
when exercising their responsibility to protect their
own nationals. Notwithstanding some progress in
some countries, much remains to be done in ensuring
accountability, as well as compliance with Security
Council resolutions on a wider scale.

In the light of that background, Italy is ready to
support the horizontal recommendations set forth
by the Secretary-General. In particular, we support
the inclusion of sexual violence as an automatic and
independent designation criterion in all relevant
sanctions regimes. We also consider that the work of the
Security Council should benefit from a more systematic
involvement of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
with the Office of the ICC Prosecutor receiving the
necessary resources to conduct swift investigations.
When national or international courts are unable to
act, the Security Council should create international
fact-finding mechanisms in order to conduct gender-
sensitive investigations and ensure the collection and
preservation of evidence.

Tackling the root causes of violence is indeed key,
as the prevention of systematic sexual violence begins
in times of peace, when national laws should be made
sufficiently robust to prevent permissive attitudes
in wartime. We need a paradigm shift based on the
dismantlement of those rules, including the patriarchal
ones, that are at the base of violence and the affirmation
of a full culture of gender equality, which can ensure
the complete and effective participation of women and
girls in the decision-making process. Our action should
be guided by a comprehensive and multidisciplinary
approach, with the aim of banning any form of gender
violence, including harmful practices. Training remains
an essential component of our efforts and should
encompass a wide range of actors, including youth,
leaders, military and police units and Civilian personnel.

Establishing a stronger female presence in
United Nations missions should also be a priority in
order to facilitate dialogue with local populations
and encourage victims to speak out and enhance the
mandate's delivery, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians. At the same time, it is critical
to assist countries in situations of conflict in reforming
their judicial systems and strengthening the rule of law
and their accountability mechanisms. Let me recall, in
this respect, that Italy will host in Rome in late May the
preparatory conference for the review of Sustainable
Development Goal 16.
We also concur on the need to provide appropriate
reintegration support for the victims of sexual abuse
and exploitation. Our commitment in this respect is
well-documented, as Italy is the largest contributor to
the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Victims
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and supports other
initiatives in this area. Last but not least, the involvement
ofcivil society actors is also key to achieving sustainable
results, and we have heard a clear reflection of that in
the interventions of today's briefers.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Italy's strong
commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda and, in this context, to the prevention and
tackling of sexual violence in conflict. We will
continue to support the work of the Secretary-General
and of his Special Representative to pursue better and
increasingly tangible results in this field.

