Ms. Tasneem (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
complimenting you, Mr. President, on the manner in
which you have stewarded the Council's deliberations
during the current month, as well as on your initiative
in organizing this open debate on a subject so close to
every Bangladeshi heart.

Mr. Guehenno's comprehensive briefing also
deserves high praise. We feel privileged by the
presence of Ms. Angela King and Ms. Amy Smythe.

Gender mainstreaming and women's
empowerment are key components of Bangladesh's
foreign policy thrusts. They have indeed gone a long
way towards aiding our own positive societal
transformation, as well as towards marginalizing
extremist and irrational thought and action. They have
helped render moderation and tolerance the twin
characteristics of Bangladeshi society, and enabled us
to play the constructive role that we play in the global
arena.

It is therefore no accident that in the Council
Bangladesh was so closely associated with the
evolution and adoption of landmark resolution 1325
(2000). It was the Bangladeshi presidency that issued
the statement on women and peace for the first time in
the Council on International Women's Day in March
2000. The thesis of that statement was that equal access
to, and full participation of, women in power structures
and their full involvement in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts were essential ingredients for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.

On the third anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), we need to reflect further on how best to
advance its implementation. We need to analyse what
poses the main challenges and how they can be
overcome. Certain practical steps immediately come to
mind. One is adequate representation of women at all
levels of decision-making, both at the pre-conflict stage
and during hostilities. The same applies at all points in
peacekeeping, peace-building, reconciliation and
reconstruction. The other is the need to continue to
maintain sustained commitment at all times to gender
justice and women's empowerment. Ensuring
protection from, and zero-tolerance for, impunity for
war crimes committed against women are of paramount
importance. Greater representation of women in
peacekeeping operations and the appointment of a
special representative to the Secretary-General should
make profound impacts in enhancing gender sensitivity
at all stages of peace missions.

While numbers are important, it is equally
significant that issues pertaining to gender be
mainstreamed and integrated so that outcomes benefit
women. That empowerment must be effected both
politically and economically. Your delegation, Mr.
President, has initiated in the Third Committee this
year a draft resolution on women and political
participation. We commend you on that. Bangladesh
has co-sponsored that draft resolution, because we
deeply believe in its contents.

Once a peace process is set into motion, women's
groups and networks can be energized to work together
with the United Nations system to educate and raise
awareness with regard to human rights and the rule of
law in areas of conflict. Their adequate participation in
peace negotiations will help them focus on the special
difficulties that women confront at such times. It is
during the stages of peace-building and reconstruction
that women can make an even greater contribution.

Recently, the Second Committee, which the
Ambassador of Bangladesh has the privilege to chair
this year, organized a panel discussion on women's
empowerment, microcredit and poverty eradication.
Simple innovative ideas like microcredit and non-
formal education for women in post-conflict societies
can render an immense service to positive societal
transformations. A politically and economically
empowered woman who is also educated can form the
backbone of any post-conflict society- indeed, all
post-conflict societies. In many places devastated by
conflict- Kosovo, Timor-Leste, Afghanistan and
others - microcredit has proved to have a stabilizing
effect on local economies. Immediate access to
financial resources for the most disadvantaged, such as
war widows and other female heads of household,
provided employment, generated income, improved
food security for the family unit and jump-started the
economic development process.

Bangladesh's experience in empowering rural
women through micro-credits and education is well
known. Our investments in women have contributed to
the values of pluralism, democracy and human rights.
We believe that those ideals provide the matrix for
sustainable peace. We are prepared to share this with
the world, particularly with societies of a comparable
milieu. Bangladesh's vibrant civil society organizations
work to spread those values in Africa, Afghanistan and
Timor-Leste. Our peacekeepers, one of the largest
contingents in United Nations peacekeeping, carry
those ideals with them, aiming to impart them to
people in distant parts. The United Nations system,
particularly the Security Council, can collate those
experiences and practices, examine and study them and
transmit them in an institutionalized fashion. This may
contribute to move us forward from advocacy to
implementation, from thought to action and from hope
to fruition.

