Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having organizing this open debate
on preventing sexual violence in conflict - an issue
that is affecting civilians more frequently, particularly
women.

At the outset, I would express my appreciation
at seeing you, Sir, preside over the work of the
Security Council in June. Your presidency reflects
the commitment of your country in supporting
peace throughout the world. Allow me also to pay
heartfelt tribute to the leadership of your predecessor,
Ambassador Kodjo Menan of Togo. I also warmly thank
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her excellent briefing. We also encourage her tireless
efforts in continuing the work of her predecessor,
Ms. Margot Wallstrom.

Armed groups have always used pressure tactics
of rape, forced marriage and sexual slavery against
populations, especially women, to impose control
over their communities. Those horrendous practices
have also been used to force populations to move,
which has led to unbearable humanitarian situations in
neighbouring countries.

In that context, I express my condemnation of the
new trend of using sexual violence in order to gain
illegal access to natural resources. Beyond undermining
morale and trampling the dignity of the people who are
the victims, those crimes also seriously undermine the
development efforts of countries already suffering the
effects of poverty.

As timely highlighted by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2013/149), the failure of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform efforts in many countries has led, as we know,
to violations against women. In addition, there is a risk
of reprisals against the victims of sexual violence.

Only a strong message, backed up by a holistic
strategy on the part of the international community, will
lead to the control of that phenomenon, which entails
such disastrous consequences for maternal and child
health, populations, international peace and security as
well as for our people's well-being.

That leads me to welcome resolution 2106 (2013),
which the Council has just adopted and which places
victims at the heart of efforts to combat sexual violence
and to improve conflict resolution. On that basis, efforts
to combat this scourge should be based on adequate
prevention as well as on accountability, which helps
to dissuade people from committing these crimes once
again. Prevention is first and foremost the responsibility
of Governments, particularly of security forces, which
have a duty to protect their own citizens. We need to
support the countries affected in establishing the rule
of law by enhancing the capacity of the security forces
in a substantive way and by developing their legal
capacities. The basic goal is to fill the gaps in terms of
their protection and judicial mechanisms, particularly
in the spheres of intelligence, investigations and
prosecution of perpetrators. In that regard, we are happy
to see the significant progress achieved by various
countries thanks to the United Nations campaign on
sexual violence in conflict, which includes "firewood
patrols" in Darfur and an early-warning system in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Moreover, it is important to underscore the fact
that the prevention effort is also a collective one, as it
transcends borders and deals with a phenomenon that
poses a serious threat to peace and security throughout
the world. Worse yet, acts of sexual violence constitute
crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of
genocide, in line with the decision handed down by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in the
Jean-Paul Akayesa case.

This shows the importance of taking into account
sexual violence in the context of preventive diplomacy,
particularly when ceasefire agreements are reached
between warring parties. In that connection, I support
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General to
establish monitoring mechanisms for the commitments
entered into by parties during the good offices process,
in line with resolution 1960 (2010). That also applies
to peacekeeping missions and to special political
missions, which should have a sufficient number of
women's protection advisers.

Combating impunity at the international level
continues to be a major pillar, indeed an indispensable
one, in combating sexual Violence. Those who tolerate
or perpetuate these serious and unacceptable crimes
must be held accountable for their acts. In that regard,
the International Criminal Court must, in accordance
with the principle of complimentarity with national
jurisdictions, play a leading role in administeringjustice
for the benefit of the many victims of sexual abuse in
conflict. In that connection, I would like to pay tribute
to the Group of Eight agreement on sexual violence in
conflict, which reflects the Group's commitment in the
light of this serious phenomenon.

I would like to encourage the Council to adopt a
holistic approach in combating sexual violence, as well
as to reiterat the unfailing determination of my country
to protect future generations from this longstanding
legacy.

