Ms. Abdelkawy (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate. I would also like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed,
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and the representative of civil society for their
valuable contributions.

The Secretary-General in his report this year
(S/2018/250) mentions that the past few months have
seen positive developments, the most important of
which was the release of many women and girls by
armed terrorist groups. However, those developments
are coupled with challenges, the most important of
which is the need to rehabilitate and reintegrate those
women and girls into their societies.

Recently, terrorist groups have begun to use
sexual violence as a tool to exploit religion or race or
as a means of expanding control of territory. Egypt
expresses its concern about the lack of accountability of
terrorist groups, including the organization of Islamic
State and Boko Haram, for sexual violence committed
against women and girls in armed conflict areas. In this
context, we would like to stress the following points.

First, we reiterate our call for the reports of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
to remain committed to the mandates issued in the
Security Council resolutions, so that such mandates
achieve their desired goals in armed conflict areas and
post-conflict situations.

Second, effective development, the eradication of
poverty and the economic empowerment of women and
girls are factors that can help end sexual exploitation
and abuse in armed conflict areas and post-conflict
situations. We stress the important role of the donor
community in that regard.

Third, we welcome the work of the United Nations
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, in cooperation with the United
Nations specialized funds, programmes and agencies,
particularly with regard to building the capacities of
States in armed conflict or post-conflict situations
in the areas of investigation, prosecution, military
justice, legislative reform, protection of witnesses
and reparations. We welcome the work of the United
Nations Action Network against Sexual Violence in
Conflict. We call for coordinated work between the
Team of Experts and the Network to improve the United
Nations response to sexual violence in conflict areas.

Fourth, we welcome action by the United Nations to
address conflict-related sexual violence, including by
increasing the number of women protection advisers on
the ground. In that regard, we have contributed female
staff to the police and military components of United
Nations missions in the Sudan and Western Sahara and
to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur since 2009.

Fifth, we support the efforts of the Special
Coordinator on improving the United Nations response
to sexual exploitation and abuse, within her mandate,
to address cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations personnel or personnel under the
United Nations flag. We are committed to the zero-
tolerance policy of the Secretary-General with regard
to sexual exploitation crimes. We continue to work with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to end all
forms of violence against women in peace operations.

Sixth, the national curricula provided to
peacekeeping troops during training should include
guidance on how to deal with sexual violence. In that
connection, the Cairo International Center for Conflict
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding, in
coordination with the Egyptian Ministry of Defence,
includes the issue of combating sexual violence in
armed conflict in the predeployment training of the
Egyptian military, police or civilian personnel that take
part in peacekeeping forces. The Center also offers
such training to civilian, military and police elements
from Arab and African States that take part in United
Nations peacekeeping.

Seventh, we stress the need for concerted
international efforts to build the capacities of local and
religious leaders to raise awareness in societies and
communities on the need to eliminate the stereotype
and stigma of victims of sexual violence and their
children. It is the perpetrators who should bear that
stigma instead. The victims should not be criminalized.
We commend the role ofAl-Azhar Al-Sharifin rejecting
the advisory opinions of terrorist groups on the status
of women in conflict areas.

Eighth, there must be respect for culturally specific
elements of States when dealing with victims of
sexual violence - whether men or women - during
armed conflict.

In conclusion, we call for renewed political and
ethical commitment to the empowerment of women
in conflict and post-conflict areas and States. Women
are key contributors to transitions from conflict to
development and from societies torn by armed conflict to
sound societies able to achieve sustainable development.

