Mr. Montoya (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. We thank you for issuing the concept paper
(S/2009/490, annex) serving as the basis for today's
discussion.

Colombia's experience demonstrates the
importance of implementing gender strategies that
include the social, economic and cultural dimensions,
among other factors. Thus, since 2003, the national
Government has been carrying out an affirmative
policy that ensures women's empowerment in all areas.
For example, mindful of the particular needs of women
at the local level, we are promoting the establishment
and enhancement of women's community councils,
which are spaces for discussion in departments and
municipalities, created to increase their participation
and increase the visibility of the role that they play in
development in their regions. This tool links women to
the Government's policies and programmes, promotes
development with gender equity and encourages or
strengthens gender mainstreaming processes at the
regional level.

In that connection, we are advancing the rural
women's agenda, which includes actions to enhance
respect for and guarantee the effective enjoyment of
rural women's rights. The Office of the Adviser on
Women's Equality, a governmental entity, has launched
a project to increase the visibility of and enhance the
situation of indigenous women, young women and
girls, as part of the policy entitled "Women: Builders
of Peace and Development". To that end, three regional
laboratories and a central forum have been established
to create spaces for dialogue and raise awareness about
the importance of the efforts being made by women in
their communities. The space created for dialogue

between the Office of the Adviser and the indigenous
women participating in the three laboratories is
contributing to the development of a joint programme
of work that includes efforts being made by women in
their own areas. The goal is to develop an affirmative
action plan for indigenous peoples, with an emphasis
on women.

In addition, with the support of the European
Union and citizen support, the programme Laboratories
of Peace has been established in violence-affected
areas. Through the programme, with the tools of the
rule of law, we are exploring courses of action that
Colombian society and local communities must take to
address violence and promote sustainable development.
Women are benefiting from and/or carrying out
projects to promote peace in their areas.

In the peacebuilding process, entities of the
Colombian State are working together to ensure the
inclusion of a gender-based perspective, as well as full
participation by women in violence prevention.

Furthermore, we have developed guidelines for
assistance to displaced persons, taking a gender-based
approach. The objective of the guidelines is to assist in
consolidating public policy aimed at displaced persons,
in order to provide effective assistance that meets the
specific needs of women and addresses the impact of
displacement on them. The guidelines were based on
three guiding principles: participation, a rules-based
approach and a gender-based approach. They are
structured around three phases: prevention and
protection, emergency humanitarian assistance, and
socio-economic stabilization.

Additionally, the State has made efforts to ensure
access to justice and special protection for women
victims of displacement and sexual violence
perpetrated by illegal groups. The Office of the
General Prosecutor is promoting a comprehensive
action strategy to uphold the fundamental rights of
women victims. The programme is based on a specific
methodology to address the impact of this phenomenon
on Colombian women.

Our national policy for the social and economic
reintegration of those who have left illegal armed
groups seeks to ensure that institutional actions fully
incorporate a gender-based approach. In particular,
assistance to women, children and ethnic minorities in
the reintegration process is taken into account by
identifying the characteristics of population groups and
promoting the family's dynamic role in the process.
Likewise, we are carrying out a programme to prevent
violence in families that include reintegrated persons.

Strengthening the role and the capacity of
women, as well as respect for their rights, is a central
aspect for the Government of Colombia. In such
efforts, the assistance of the United Nations system and
the international community is essential. My country,
as a member of the group Friends of 1325, will
continue to closely follow developments in the area of
women and peace and security. Colombia reaffirms its
commitment to the implementation of policies, plans
and programmes that broaden and strengthen the role
of women in peacebuilding.

