Mr. Roet (Israel): As we are approaching the end
of the month, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and commend you, Sir, for your able stewardship of the
Security Council this month.

All around the world, the lives and well-being of
millions of women and girls are threatened by conflict
and strife. They are often the first victims of war and
the last to share in the fruits ofpeace. Yet when it comes
to making the decisions that impact them most directly,
the voices of women are too often silenced.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) we
have witnessed greater determination to engage women
in conflict resolution. But in too many places around
the world, women are still denied a place in the halls
of power. They are kept out of critical discussions on
war and peace and excluded from decision-making
and negotiations.

Women are proven catalysts of change, and the time
has come to ensure that women everywhere have an
opportunity to become active agents of peace instead
of passive victims of war. Today, as we witness the
rise of new forms of conflicts and terrorism, women's
participation is crucial to bringing about a safer, more
sustainable and more secure future.

Nowhere is the active role of women in waging
peace more critical than in Africa. For decades,
countries across the continent have been plagued by
civil war, ethnic conflict and sectarian strife. At the
same time, violent extremist terrorist groups, such as
Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, are destabilizing States
across Africa. They are conducting vicious campaigns
of terror against innocents, including widespread
torture and the burning down of entire villages.

Women and girls face the nightmare of being
abducted, torn from their families and sold as sex
slaves - a truly horrific and cruel fate. From Libya
to Nigeria to Kenya, the ongoing violence has brought
devastation to millions. Women across Africa know the
cruel impact that war and terror have on their families
and their communities. After terror strikes, after the
militias have passed through, they are the ones fending
for themselves and struggling to feed their children.
They know the cost of conflict, and many are refusing
to stand by in silence while the violence rages on.

Today, women have started to take their fate into
their own hands and to take an active role in shaping
the future of their own societies. It is up to all of us to
ensure that women have an opportunity to play leading
roles in peace negotiation and conflict resolution. That
is the path to a sustainable peace for everyone.

In Africa, that process has already begun. From the
adoption of the Maputo Protocol, in 2003, to the African
Union's Gender, Peace and Security Programme for
2015-2020, important steps have been taken. Such
mechanisms, structures and policies enable women to
take their rightful place at the decision-making table.
Ms. Delgado took the Chair.

Across Africa, women are taking the initiative to
develop innovative platforms for peaceful elections.
They have established strong networks of civil-society
groups to promote women's strategic participation and
leadership in peace and security governance in Africa.
However, despite those important initiatives, the number
of women that participate in field-based political
missions or in peace talks in Africa is still limited. We
must remove all gender-based barriers so that women
in Africa can develop the skills and expertise needed to
take on leadership roles in their societies.

Women in Africa are shifting the balance of power,
and the State of Israel stands ready to assist them. We
know at first hand the destructive consequences of
terror and conflict, but we also know the constructive
role that women play in leading the way to peace. As
an ally and partner of many African countries, Israel
is committed to helping women in Africa to take an
active role in deciding the fateful questions of war
and peace. The partnership between Israel and Africa
is not new. For over 40 years, Israel's Agency for
International Development Cooperation (MASHAV)
has been conducting programmes throughout Africa
to reduce gender disparities and to train women
to participate in decision-making processes. In
cooperation with the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, every year
MASHAV organizes a workshop for African women
on the political empowerment of women. The goal is
to discuss the role of, and opportunities for, women
in peacebuilding, mediation and conflict resolution.
MASHAV encourages and supports women in their
efforts to acquire the skills and knowledge necessary to
become political leaders.

Let me recount the story of one of those women,
Ms. Dudziro Nhengu. Dudziro always wanted to
participate in political life in her home country,
Zimbabwe, but opportunities were limited owing to the
economic situation and the ongoing political violence.
She therefore decided to participate in MASHAV's
training programmes, one in Kenya and another
one in Israel. Dudziro quickly put the business and
entrepreneurial skills that she had honed at MASHAV
into practice in Zimbabwe to design a programme
to empower women to initiate their own businesses
and transform former military bases into training
centres. Today, Dudziro is a blogger, an activist and a
Programme Associate of UN-Women. It is programmes
and partnerships like MASHAV that contribute to our
shared goal - ensuring that women everywhere can
achieve their full potential.

A famous Jewish proverb asks, "If I am not for
myself, who will be for me?" In Africa, women have
answered that question loudly and clearly. They are
proudly standing up for themselves and for everyone
else. The proverb concludes by asking, "If not now,
when?". For the sake of peace and security in Africa
and around the world, the answer must be today; the
time for women to lead is now.

