Mr. Shaanika (Namibia): I would like to thank
the United Kingdom, Mr. President, for scheduling this
important debate. I would also to thank the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, Ms. Angela Joli
and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar for their illuminating
introductory presentations on sexual violence in
conflict. Their presentations, together with the concept
paper you circulated, Mr. President (S/2013/335, annex),
has undoubtedly guided our deliberations today.

Sexual violence, wherever it is committed, is a
crime against humanity. When committed in conflict
situations, it is more than a double-edged sword for
the victim. As highlighted in the concept note, this not
only affects a large number of women and girls, but
also men and boys. Without downplaying the impact
of sexual violence on men and boys, women and girls
are often more disproportionately affected because the
impact of such acts and the consequences with which
they have to live are often much more severe than for
men and boys. However, no human being should be
subjected to such a heinous and disgraceful crime. It is
a pure manifestation of evil that cannot be justified or
tolerated in the twenty-first century.

In conflict situations, the dignity of women and
girls must be respected; they cannot be treated as
subhuman. First, they are human beings endowed with
the right to pursue happiness in every possible way.
Secondly, they are grandmothers, mothers, wives,
sisters and little girls in the eyes of their parents and
in their communities in general. In conflict situations
too, the family bond remains and it must be accorded
adequate protection.

My country has made its modest contribution
to the issue of women in peace. During Namibia's
presidency ofthe Council in October 2000, a discussion
was initiated and an open debate held (see S/PV.4213)
that culminated in the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). The Council has also adopted resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), which highlight
the seriousness of sexual violence as a threat to
international peace and security. The urgent question
confronting the international community today is, what
are the appropriate strategies to end sexual violence in
conflict?

The international justice mechanism should
support the restoration or establishment of justice and
accountability at the national level. The empowerment
of women and girls, as well as the education of boys
about the rights of girls and women, are some of
important elements that instil nurturing and responsible
behavioural patterns. We welcome the call by the
Group of Eight for urgent action to address impunity
and to hold perpetrators of sexual violence in armed
conflicts accountable. There can be no sympathy for
any person or group of persons who commit sexual
violence anywhere. My delegation acknowledges the
important role that the Council plays by encouraging
the development of joint Government-United Nations
comprehensive strategies on combating sexual violence.

We encourage the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to work with Governments and
armed groups to seek their commitment to becoming
accountable in the quest to prevent sexual violence. We
also support the proposal to deploy women's protection
advisers to United Missions missions, as well as to
address sexual violence in the context of security
sector reform. Furthermore, my delegation supports the
establishment ofa mechanism to monitor commitments
by parties to a conflict, including issuing clear orders
through the chains of command and enacting codes
of conduct prohibiting sexual Violence. Those who
have been identified and proved beyond a reasonable
doubt to have perpetrated or condoned acts of sexual
violence should in future be excluded from any security
institutions, or from holding positions of influence.
Specific measures to impose targeted sanctions on
those committing or condoning sexual violence should
be taken against the perpetrators. When the use of
legal mechanisms are insufficient to fight against
sexual violence in the quest for justice, reforms in the
administration of justice and the legislative process
may become necessary.

While this debate is mainly addressing issues
of sexual violence, we must also focus our attention
beyond the realm of conflict periods. However, we are
concerned about the continued low representation of
women in all structures and phases of the peacebuilding
processes. In spite of the disproportionate impact of
conflict on women, they continue to hold their families
and communities together, often undertaking initiatives
between warring factions under extremely difficult
conditions. When included in formal peace processes,
they bring their experiences to bear on the parties.
It is therefore imperative that they be included at all
peacebuilding levels.

It is unfortunate that, more often than not, the efforts
of women are insufficiently recognized and supported,
both politically and financially. As a result, women's

rights are rarely integrated into peace agreements or
post-conflict support structures.

In conclusion, my delegation urges the Security
Council to act expeditiously on the information
presented to it. The paramount consideration should be
that more needs to be done to protect women and girls
and men and boys from the scourge of sexual violence.
I support the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

