Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We wish you very well,
Mr. President, in leading us in the Security Council this
month. We also appreciate the presence and valuable
inputs from the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura,
Ms. Giammarinara and Ms. Davis.

The Secretary-General's latest report (S/2016/361)
and the briefers paint a deeply disturbing picture. We
are horrified by the trafficking for purposes of sexual
exploitation by terrorist and violent extremist groups.
Those are not isolated incidents; they represent a
pattern and a policy. Tragically, due to the realities of
today's conflicts, many victims are beyond the reach
of national and international protection mechanisms.
There are nevertheless steps we can take to address the
drivers of this disturbing trend, to deter and disrupt the
violence that is occurring and to ensure accountability
for those crimes and support for survivors.

First, we must redouble efforts to address the
conditions that leave civilians vulnerable to abuse and
exploitation and that allow terrorist and criminal groups
to carry out these crimes with impunity. The surge
in conflict-related sexual violence is often a product
of protracted conflict and the collapse of protection
mechanisms and national judicial frameworks. We
cannot expect a significant improvement until those
conflicts are resolved and the groups themselves that
are responsible for the majority of the crimes have
been defeated.

Secondly, we need to counter narratives that attempt
to legitimise and justify those practices. The promise
of a bride or sex slave is a motivating factor for many
foreign terrorist fighters. We support the Secretary-
General's call to mainstream efforts to combat
premeditated and systematic targeting of civilians,
particularly women and girls, into our strategies for
preventing and countering violent extremism. We also
welcome the inclusion of sexual violence in conflict as
an area of focus in the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the strategic threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

Thirdly, we need to do more at domestic, regional
and international levels. Domestically, we need to
ensure we have national frameworks and processes in
place to prosecute nationals, including overseas. And
we need to work effectively with other States to identify
such individuals. In New Zealand our focus has been
on criminalizing the trafficking in persons, disrupting
criminal and terrorist networks and addressing related
crimes, including through the tracing and confiscation
of financial assets. As a party to the Protocol to Prevent,

Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, New
Zealand's legislation has been tightened so that our
citizens and residents can be charged for those types of
offenses, even they occur outside New Zealand. That
acts as a deterrent and ensures that human traffickers
can be held accountable.

Strong regional and global cooperation and
information-sharing is vital. In the Asia-Pacific region,
our active contribution to regional efforts to tackle
human trafficking and people smuggling, through the
Bali process, has paid particular dividends. In 2015,
New Zealand led a joint period of action focused on
disrupting trafficking networks in the Asia-Pacific
region through a series of separate but coordinated law-
enforcement operations. The initiative proved highly
successful, and a second joint period of action was
initiated last month.

At the international level, the Security Council
has a role to play, including through the ISIL/Al-Qaida
sanctions regime. As the Secretary-General has made
clear, the trafficking in women and girls is a source
of financing for ISIL and its affiliates, as well as a
recruitment tool. Resolution 2253 (2015) sets out a range
of measures for choking off all sources of financing
to those groups, including the option of listing those
who transfer funds derived from sexual exploitation
and abuse. For that to be effective, however, Member
States need to actively propose individuals and entities
engaged in such activities for designation. As chair of
the ISIL/Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, New Zealand
is ready to discuss how sanctions can be more effective
in addressing human trafficking as an enabler of
terrorist groups.

Finally, we must not lose sight over the longer term
of the need to heal the scars inflicted on individuals
and communities and to hold those most responsible
accountable. Many crimes have been committed in
recent years in Syria, Iraq, northern Nigeria and
elsewhere. We have to make sure that the perpetrators of
conflict-related sexual violence are brought to justice.
In the meantime, it is crucial that we support efforts to
collect and preserve evidence.

Survivors ofthis violence - women, girls, men and
boys - must also receive adequate support, as others
have mentioned. That is necessary both to alleviate
their suffering and to enable their reintegration into
communities without prejudice or stigma. Through
education and engagement with community and faith-
based leaders, we must shift the stigma from survivors
to perpetrators. Where survivors cannot be reintegrated
to their communities, resettlement can be an important
protection tool. We call on all States to ensure that
potential exposure to trafficking for the purposes of
sexual exploitation is taken into account in engaging
refugee protection mechanisms. As the Security
Council and as the international community, we must
do everything we can to stop human trafficking and
end sexual Violence in conflict. And we must help the
victims to rebuild their lives.

