Mr. Chvojka (Czech Republic): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for organizing this open debate
on trafficking in persons in conflict situations. Human
trafficking remains one of the most common violations
of human rights worldwide. Unfortunately, the Czech
Republic is no exception.

We are a target and transit country for women and
children subjected to sex trafficking and for men and
women subjected to forced labour. According to our
annual Trajficking in Human Beings Report, 50 victims
of human trafficking were identified in the Czech
Republic, mainly from Ukraine, Nigeria, Romania
or Hungary. In 2016, the Czech Government adopted
a new national strategy to combat trafficking in
human beings. The strategy emphasizes the need for a
coordinated approach in prosecuting human trafficking
and pays increased attention to assistance rendered
to victims. Its priorities are the prevention of forced
labour and trafficking in children. Gender equality and
respect for the special needs ofmore vulnerable victims
are its basic principles.

The main framework for practical assistance to
victims is the Government programme on support
for and protection of victims of trafficking in human
beings. Annually, more than 50 victims of various
forms of human trafficking enter the programme. The
programme represents a very effective tool of victim
support and very often leads to increased chances of the
successful prosecution of perpetrators.

To keep the programme functional, we must apply
wider preventive and educational measures. Every year,
the Czech Government provides financial resources to
non-governmental organizations focusing on preventive
and informative activities on human trafficking. One
such preventive activity is social counselling aimed at
the potential victims of trafficking, provided through
low-threshold counselling centres run by specialized
non-governmental organizations.

I would like to thank the Council for the opportunity
to discuss this crucial issue. We need to send a clear
message to all of the victims of human trafficking.
We insist on their dignity and human rights, and we
are ready to use every chance to finally make human
trafficking a thing of the past.

