Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and Bolivia on your presidency of the
Security Council this month, and I thank you for
organizing today's debate. It is not a surprise that Bolivia
has chosen the theme "Promoting the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda and
sustaining peace through women's political and
economic empowerment", given Bolivia's achievements
and commitment to inclusiveness and gender equality.
It is a pleasure to note that Bolivia has the third-highest
percentage of women in Parliament, after Cuba and
Rwanda. I also thank the Secretary-General, the Under-
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of UN-
Women, as well Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah, for their
statements and informative briefings this morning.

The Security Council has adopted several resolutions
on women's political and economic empowerment, and
women's increased participation in efforts aimed at
ending conflict. Indeed, since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we now have a comprehensive framework
consisting of four pillars - prevention, participation,
protection and recovery. This debate gives us an
opportunity to take stock of the progress made, but
also to discuss concrete measures we need to take
collectively to ensure more meaningful participation
by women in peace and security - not because it
looks good or because it will make us look good, but
because the meaningful participation of women in the
prevention, mediation and resolution of conflicts, as
well as in the negotiation of peace agreements, is the
only way to resolve conflicts durably and to accelerate
post-conflict recovery. We know that women shoulder
the the heaviest human burden of conflicts. They
therefore have the highest incentive for peace. In that
regard, Rwanda believes that women not only should
but must absolutely be part of all peace processes.

In the immediate aftermath of the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi in Rwanda, and as the entire Great
Lakes region was mired in instability, my country faced
an insurgency that threatened to spoil the reconstruction
and national cohesion efforts that were under way.
To deal with that threat at the time, the Rwandan
Government turned to women whose relatives had
joined the insurgents, in an innovative programme that
we called "Come and see, go and tell". Those women
would act as emissaries to reach out to their brothers,
their husbands and their relatives who had joined the
insurgency and would make a case for them to return
home. They took ownership of the programme and
their actions were vital to the successful disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants.

Another measure that substantively contributed
to conflict prevention in Rwanda is the revision of all
land reform laws, including inheritance laws. That has
ensured equal rights to access and ownership of land
for women and men. As a result, today in Rwanda
more women than men own land titles and land-related
conflicts have drastically dropped. Impact assessments
of our land reforms have shown that land ownership by
women has contributed significantly to the economic
empowerment of families and local communities.

It is important to recognize the importance of
home-grown solutions and traditional mechanisms for
conflict resolution. Wherever armed conflict breaks
out, the social fabric breaks down. With that breakdown,
we find ourselves more often reverting to traditional
mechanisms of conflict resolution. However, that
works only when we have a social fabric that is still in
place and that we can still mobilize. I am emphasizing
that point because I believe that, as we work towards
the implementation of the agenda under discussion,
we really should put in efforts to involve the guardians
of peace, who are usually the women and elders in
society, to revive the traditional mechanisms of conflict
resolution and mediation. Locally owned mechanisms
would ensure ownership in the community and increase
the chances of successful conflict resolution. External
support and partnerships are more effective and more
sustainable when they complement and build on local
and home-grown solutions.

Women's meaningful participation in the social
and political life in Rwanda has reaped benefits and
dividends of peace and social and economic gains. We
see the clear link between the pillars of prevention,
participation, protection and recovery. It follows
that women's participation in conflict prevention
necessitates their participation at the decision-making
table where agendas are set and agreements crafted.
That requires the full involvement of women at all
levels of governance. Just last week, the President of the
Republic appointed a fully gender-balanced Cabinet,
and we were happy for once to be able to compete with
our brothers and sisters from Ethiopia. That builds on
Rwanda's already exemplary track record of women's
empowerment in other sectors. Women occupy 61 per
cent of seats in the Rwandan Parliament. Fifty per
cent of our judges are women, and 50 per cent of our
provincial governors are women. Those numbers are
well beyond the constitutional quota requirement,
which is over 30 per cent. The quota requirement was
used as an entry point concerning the rights of women,
but women have been able to deliver to the citizens and
the constituencies, earning women the trust and support
of the population that allows them to go far beyond the
constitutional requirement.

I would like to say that key to the turnaround that
is often spoken about regarding Rwanda is women's
participation. It is the backbone of Rwanda's ongoing
social and economic transformation. On that we
can speak from experience. Without women's full
participation, we would never have been able to
achieve what we have achieved in the areas of peace
and security and on the political and economic fronts.
Women's participation has now become ingrained in
our way of life. I would like to conclude with three
simple recommendations.

First, we really need to make more effective use of
existing platforms. We have a number of very useful
platforms. We cannot mention them all here, but they
include FemWise-Africa, the African Women Leaders
Network, as well as existing networks at the national,
regional and global levels. We need to encourage
women to make use of such networks and increase
their meaningful participation in the area of peace
and security.

Secondly, as was also underlined by the Secretary-
General this morning, in Rwanda we fully believe that
what is not measured never gets done. We therefore
really need an assessment and a strong accountability
mechanism, both for ourselves as members and as to
how this agenda is implemented here at Headquarters
and in peacekeeping and political missions in the field.

Last, but not least, we fully concur with the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, and we
will spare no effort on our part to implement them.

