Ms. Jean (spoke in French): At the outset, I should
like to commend France for its initiative to convene
today's high-level open debate. I am particularly
grateful to you, Sir, for inviting me here to reiterate,
for the second time, the crucial importance of the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000), of 31 October 2000, as well as resolutions that
have complemented it year after year.

Seventeen years ago, we agreed to turn obvious
truths into words. Seventeen years ago, we agreed to
recognize the importance of women's participation,
on an equal footing with men, in the areas of crisis
prevention, mediation and the maintenance and
strengthening of peace and security.

Let us start by recognizing that women did not wait
for the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) to translate
these truths into action. We saw it in Liberia. Ms. Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf was one of those women who stood
up to the warlords and mediated between the warring
parties. We saw it in Bosnia. Within communities,
women are always the first to seek reconciliation and
return. We saw it in Rwanda. Women who had been
physically harmed took the lead in reconciliation and
reconstruction efforts at the local and national levels.
In Mali, as everywhere else, when women get to the
bargaining table, their influence is real and they achieve
noteworthy results.

I am also thinking of the Ouagadougou Preliminary
Agreement of April 2012, which was written by four
women who had initially not been invited to speak.
However, faced with their insistance and the value and
content of their proposals, they ended up being admitted
to the negotiating table - yes, admitted without having
been officially invited.

Those are just a few examples among many that
speak to the real capacity of women and all the forceful
actions they take every day that contribute to peace and
security and that are wrongly overlooked. And that is
without counting the achievements of women engaged
in peacekeeping operations. I remember listening with
the greatest admiration to cohorts of women trained in

Ghana and Mali at the Pearson Peacekeeping Centre,
whose closure in 2013 I bitterly deplore.
How many resolutions, studies, meetings of
independent high-level groups and groups of experts
must there be before we do away with that abyssmal
and unacceptable figure of 9 per cent of women
participating in some 30 major negotiations over the
past 25 years? I ask myself: What are we afraid of?
Being more effective? It has been shown that women's
participation increases by 20 per cent the probability
of reaching a peace agreement that will last at least
two years, and by 35 per cent the chances of reaching a
peace agreement that will last 15 years.

We - international organizations, States and
Governments, together with civil society-must commit
ourselves resolutely to identifying and mobilizing
women in a more systematic and coordinated way to
sit at all negotiating tables and lead or take part in
dialogues and national processes. That is also one of
the central recommendations of the Abidjan seminar
on the promotion of women's participation in peace
processes in Francophone Africa, which we organized
almost a year ago, in partnership with UN-Women and
the Francophone Network for Gender Equality. Our
countries, our networks are full of remarkable women.
Let us mobilize them.

What are we waiting for to put an end to the
derisory and unacceptable figure of 3 per cent of
women participating as military personnel of United
Nations missions? What are we afraid of? Being
more productive? It has been shown that the presence
of women in those sectors contributes to improving
security forces and increasing the credibility of missions,
especially in their dealings with the population. Women
inspire confidence.

The Organisation internationale de la F rancophonie
(OIF) holds fast to the commitment, undertaken at the
Francophonie Summit in Dakar of 2014, to investing in
women and young people, who are the vectors of peace
and development actors. Our organization, which has
been involved for more than 15 years in strengthening
the French-speaking contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, is also mobilizing on the
ground in order to encourage the participation of
female staff in missions and to train security forces in
women's rights.

I will insist in a few days on all of these points
at the Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial in Vancouver,
Canada. OIF will once again sensitize its members to
that problem at the meeting that we are organizing in
the framework of the Boutros-Ghali Observatory in
late November in Paris, in partnership with the United
Nations. I do not want to see us forget the rule of law
dimension, because the banalization of excessive State
violence against citizens, the climate of impunity and
the persistence of areas of lawlessness also affect the
women and peace and security agenda.

It is clear that we need to do more. We must do
more for women's economic and social integration,
because peace, stability and security also depend on
shared and inclusive economic development. That is
the message that I will bring in five days to Bucharest,
where the World Forum of Francophone Women will
be held under the the theme, "Creation, innovation,
entrepreneurship, growth and development: Women
make their mark!"

We also must do more to fund women and peace
and security. What is the point of pleading our case if
the sums granted to fragile States to address issues of
equality between women and men still represent only
6 per cent of the total aid package and only 2 per cent of
aid reserved for peace and security, not to mention the
funding rate for local women's organizations, including
women's rights organizations, which could be described
as miniscule?

We must do more to guarantee the full recognition
of all forms of discrimination and crimes against
women, which are crimes against humanity. We must do
more to end impunity. How can one imagine genuinely
recognizing the role ofwomen as vectors ofpeace while
leaving unpunished those who trample their bodies and
dehumanize them? Year after year, resolution after
resolution, we agree to put into words the horrors that
are inflicted on women by men, even more cruelly and
more systematically in times of hostilities, conflicts
and war. It is primarily women who are targeted when
men decide to annihilate a people or a nation. The
abduction and rape of women, girls and little girls have
become weapons of mass destruction and their bellies
have become battlefields.

I cannot forget the tears of the seven year-old girl,
her mother and all the women tortured by militiamen
in the Goma region of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where I visited in 2010. And what is happening
these days? We see massacres in Kasai province and

hear stories of mutilated women, some of whom them
pregnant, who are found disemboweled. It is unbearable.

I am thinking about what happened to women in
the neighbouring countries of Rwanda and Burundi. I
am thinking of the thousands of refugee women in the
Niger, on the border with Nigeria, 70 per cent of whom
have fallen prey to Boko Haram and been subject to
the most horrendous attacks. Lest we think that it is
merely a question of Africa, I would say that it is not.
Barbarism and inhumanity know no borders, And when
there are reports of sexual abuse by United Nations
personnel, the facts are equally damning. The men in
this Chamber today are commended for not looking the
other way and for resolutely supporting us.

Today's meeting provides us with an opportunity
to affirm a real desire to act together, to continue to
act and to do more. Let us take up the challenge of
ever-increasing consultation and synergy of efforts.
This is what we decided, the four women leading,
respectively, OIF, the Ibero-American General
Secretariat, the Commonwealth and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, which comprise 167
States and Governments, or 61 per cent of the world's
population. This strategic alliance also exists to serve
the women and peace and security agenda, because
nothing without women is or ever will be possible.

