Ms. Viotti: I thank the French presidency for
highlighting the importance of the women and peace
and security agenda. Let me start by expressing
appreciation to the Security Council for its recent efforts
to bring women's voices into the centre of its work.
Earlier this month, the Council heard the moving
account of Joy Bishara, one of the young women
kidnapped in Chibok by Boko Haram. Such testimony
helps to deepen our understanding of the challenge. It
also underscores the pressing need for more concerted
and tangible action. In that spirit, today I will focus
largely on prevention - a core pillar of the women and
peace and security agenda and a key priority of the
Secretary-General.

The links between prevention and gender equality
are many and clear. Women are affected in distinct
and distinctly negative ways by armed conflict and
violence. Just as gender discrimination is a constant in
peacetime, so it prevails when society collapses into war,
with devastating impact. Women are the overwhelming
majority of victims of rape used as a weapon of war,
as well as of abductions and human trafficking. In
urban warfare, they are at particular risk during house
searches and at checkpoints. The lower women's status
is in terms of health, wealth and education, the greater
is their exposure to harm. Their underrepresentation
in the justice and security sectors and in the upper
echelons of political power likewise increases their
exposure to harm. In turn, this extreme political
marginalization undermines the potential of women as
actors for conflict prevention - a vital role that the
Security Council has emphasized repeatedly, including
in resolution 2242 (2015) and the twin resolutions on
sustaining peace (Security Council resolution 2286 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262).

Whenthe Councilvisitedthe Lake Chadbasin earlier
this year, local leaders all raised women's empowerment
and its relationship with birth rates - which are among
the highest in the world - in their discussions about
root causes and solutions to the current crisis. When
four senior leaders of the United Nations and the
African Union, led by the Deputy Secretary-General,
visited Nigeria together in the first high-level mission
of its kind focused entirely on women and peace and
security, they found that in spite of the presence of
strong networks of women peacebuilders and activists,
the views of women were underrepresented both in the
military and in the humanitarian response. Recently,
the Group of Women Facilitators in Guinea-Bissau - a
network of civil society leaders - came together to
defuse a potentially explosive political impasse and
to open a communications channel between two main
political leaders that had been closed for two years.

Indeed, there are countless women-led prevention
initiatives that are either insufficiently supported or
disconnected from national or regional early-warning
mechanisms or decision-making bodies in general.
The Secretary-General is strongly committed to
promoting gender equality in the work of the United
Nations for peace and security, and to fully integrating
conflict gender analysis into that work. His Executive
Office includes a Senior Adviser in policy at the level
of Under-Secretary-General, with twin mandates on
prevention and gender, who is working to ensure the
linkages between the two. The Secretary-General's
current visit to the Central African Republic aims not
only to support the operation at this fragile moment,
but also to witness first-hand how the new approach to
preventing sexual exploitation and abuse is translating
into changes on the ground.

The Secretary-General has also put forward a
concrete plan to achieve gender parity across the
United Nations. In this regard, we are farthest behind
in our peace operations in crisis countries, where the
role of women is often needed most. We are working
with troop- and police-contributing countries to
increase the number of female uniformed personnel. It
is simply unacceptable that in 2017 only 3 per cent of
our peacekeepers - the most visible face of the United
Nations - are women.

We are also striving to increase the pool of women
mediators. The recently established High-Level
Advisory Board on Mediation is both high-level and
gender-balanced. The new Office of Counter-Terrorism
is integrating a gender perspective into its efforts to
address this threat and prevent violent extremism, and
proposals for the reform of the Secretariat's peace and
security architecture must include a strong emphasis
on strengthening the link between political strategies
and gender expertise. Looking ahead, our efforts to
strengthen the United Nations capacity for effective
prevention will also include the following.

First, we will engage more systematically with
women's organizations on the ground as natural
partners for prevention.

Secondly, we will ensure that our prevention
initiatives and monitoring include a focus on women's
rights violations, including violence against women
and girls, anti-women rhetoric, increased levels of
militarization, shifts in the political marginalization
of women or women's groups and strict enforcement
of traditional gender norms, dress codes, segregation
of the sexes or other steps that may not adhere to
international human rights standards.
Thirdly, we will tackle the structural and root
causes of crisis, including gender inequality.

Fourthly, we will strengthen the collection and
analysis of gender statistics and encourage Member
States to monitor gender-quality indicators as part of
their work to implement the Sustainable Development
Goals. Gender equality and the security of women are
among the most reliable indicators of peace.

Fifthly, 17 years sincethe adoption ofresolution 1325
(2000), our own implementation too often remains ad
hoc. While there is clear recognition of the relationship
between gender equality, women's participation and
stability and resilience, too little is being done to
operationalize that understanding. Starting next year,
the Secretary-General's annual report on this issue will
focus more on results and less on our own activities. I
invite all participants to share their evidence, examples
and impacts. Let use this opportunity to examine gaps
and build on successes.

Implementing that vision will depend upon
deepening our partnership with Member States, regional
organizations and civil society. We look forward
to working with participants based on their shared
conviction that women's meaningful participation
makes our peace efforts stronger and more sustainable.

