Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for chairing and having organized this open
debate and included the perspectives of civil society in
our discussion. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and leadership on this critical issue, and
Special Representative Bangura, Special Rapporteur
Giammarinaro and Ms. Davis for their briefings.

The Council has long recognized that sexual and
gender-based violence not only abuses and violates
the human rights of its victims, but also undermines
the security, livelihood and health of nations by
suppressing survivors' participation in civic, social,
political and economic life. We have put in many
place many tools for countering conflict-related sexual
violence inflicted by State and non-State armed groups,
improving accountability, bringing perpetrators to
justice, documenting violations against marginalized
groups of victims, including women and girls, men and
boys, ethnic and religious minorities; and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex individuals. But we
must do a betterjob making use of these tools.

We commend Special Representative Bangura
for her energetic efforts to translate the Council's
resolutions into real, on-the-ground action. Her work
with the national militaries of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and armed groups on both sides of the
conflict in South Sudan to help develop structures to
hold perpetrators accountable for their actions has been
particularly noteworthy. We also applaud her efforts to
support the investigation of the 2009 stadium massacre
in Guinea. In addition to the Special Representative's
efforts, we value the work carried out by the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, which has assisted countries in the areas
investigations and prosecutions, strengthening legal
frameworks and ensuring the protection of victims and
witnesses. However, significant challenges remain in
countering sexual violence in conflict, especially when
it comes to holding non-State armed groups and their
partners and associates accountable for their crimes.

In resolution 2242 (2015), the Council recognized
the nexus of sexual violence, terrorism and violent
extremism, which can be conducive to terrorism. We
have seen steady growth in the use of sexual violence
against women, men, girls and boys by terrorists not
only in Iraq and Syria, but also in Somalia, Nigeria and
Mali. Non-State armed groups like the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) use sexual violence in a
premeditated and systemic way to recruit fighters, raise
money and intimidate and demoralize communities in
order to consolidate their hold over territory. Resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015) not only strongly condemn
such acts by ISIL, Al-Qaida and their associates, but
also work to strengthen accountability by encouraging
all State and non-State actors with evidence to bring
it to the attention of the Council. The Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida,
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities represents a vital tool for us to punish
perpetrators, since any individual who makes funds
or other financial and economic resources available
to ISIL and other terrorist groups, in connection with
sexual violence, is eligible for designation in the 1267
sanctions regime. We must make full use of those tools.

As noted by Special Rapporteur Giammarinaro, we
also need to more to protect displaced women and girls
whose heightened vulnerability puts them at increased
risk of sexual violence and trafficking. Over the past
year, we have seen the continuation of mass migration
from Syria, Iraq and the Horn of Africa. Reports of
smugglers demanding sex as payment of passage are
rampant and part ofa global surge in human trafficking.
With regard to Ms. Davis' intervention, that is why last

month at the World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul,
the United States announced an additional $10 million
contribution to the Safe from the Start initiative to
prevent and respond to gender-based violence in
emergency situations.

The United States urges all Member States to
condemn such crimes and those who commit them, to
properly document such horrors so that one day those
responsible can be held accountable, to commit to ending
the conflicts that provide an ideal climate for human
traffickers, and to commit to eradicating the groups
that use human trafficking and conflict-related sexual
violence as a weapon of war. Member States must also
work to ensure that labour practices, such as charging
workers recruitment fees that can lead to debt bondage,
do not contribute to human trafficking. We must teach
people how to actually see the victims of trafficking.
We must also make our resources for victims more
victim- and survivor-centred, incorporating victims
and survivors into policy-making process so as to yield
better solutions.

A further challenge is the lack of global
documentation of the phenomenon of sexual and gender-
based violence against all vulnerable communities,
including those that are too often forgotten in this
discourse, namely lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
individuals, as well as men and boys. Those individuals
are not only at a heightened risk of facing harassment,
abuse and sexual violence committed by armed groups
as a result of discriminatory social norms and attitudes,
but they also face a strong stigma against reporting
such abuses. We commend the Secretary-General for
highlighting the victimization of men and boys in his
report (S/2016/361).

The United Nations and Member States must more
fully embrace a general inclusive approach in sexual
violence and gender-based violence programming.
There is scant documentation on the subject, with little
understanding of the prevailing patterns and the severity
of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence
against males, as compared to sexual and gender-based
violence against girls and women. In addition, the
absence of targeted services for male victims not only
fails to address the needs of boys and men, but could
also contribute to the problem of underreporting.

Bilateral efforts to counter conflict-related
sexual violence and to improve accountability and
documentation are also crucial. In 2014, the United
States launched the Accountability Initiative to
support the development of specialized justice-sector
mechanisms to improve access to justice for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence. We remain
committed to strengthening efforts to protect all people
from harm, exploitation, discrimination, abuse, gender-
based violence and trafficking. We must, as all of the
speakers have noted, hold perpetrators accountable,
especially in conflict-affected environments.

The United States has also committed nearly
$40 million for support to victims of sexual violence in
conflict, including in Nigeria, where the United States
supports United Nations agencies, community groups
and local non-governmental organizations that provide
health-care services, including appropriate psychosocial
counselling for women and children who have survived
Boko Haram's horrific campaign. However, we
recognize that support programmes are not enough.
In order to combat sexual violence in conflict, women
must have a seat at the table in resolving conflicts.
Empowered women provide powerful antidotes to
violent extremism and have critical contributions
to make at every level of our struggle against sexual
violence in conflict.

We also need women in uniform to rebuild trust
between law enforcement and communities, female
correction officers and female counsellors to reach out
to female inmates who are on the path to radicalization,
and women legislators to support more inclusive public
policies that address the unique grievances that drive
individuals to terrorism. As Secretary of State Kerry
has said, fighting the scourge of sexual violence
requires all of those tools, including Security Council
resolutions, better reporting and support to survivors.
It especially requires holding criminals accountable
and ending impunity. Instead of shaming the survivors,
we must punish the perpetrators, and we must be ready
to support and empower the survivors as they work to
rebuild their lives.

