Mr. Moura (Portugal): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative Zainab Bangura for their remarks.
I commend all Council members for the adoption by
consensus of resolution 2106 (2013) today, which
Portugal has co-sponsored and which will help us to
further implement our common fight agains sexual
violence.

Portugal obviously shares the Views that will be
expressed by the observer of the European Union,
but allow me to underline some aspects of particular
significance to my country.

In recent years, Security Council resolutions have
recognized sexual violence as a tactic of war and its
potential to undermine peace and security. We need to
recognize that much has been accomplished since 2010.
Monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements have
been established in a number of conflict or post-conflict
situations to collect more consistent information on
conflict related sexual Violence. A list of parties to
conflicts that are credibly suspected of committing
sexual violence on a repeated basis has been set up.
A dialogue with those parties has been established
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to obtain protection commitments and the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict has been formed to
assist national authorities to reinforce judicial systems.
Last but not least, the Council has adopted sanctions
against perpetrators that have been identified or that
are credibly suspected of having committed sexual
Violence in situations of armed conflict on its agenda.

Portugal values those significant achievements
because there is no real security without women's
security. The achievements will increasingly make
sexual violence a liability for armed groups by
exposing their leaders to international scrutiny and
pressure. Another accomplishment that we value is
the knowledge that has been developed on the issue
in the past three years by the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The different
dimensions of the problem are now better understood,
and by better understanding the problem, the
international community will be in a better position to
fight it efficiently.
Portugal recognizes that, while the Council has
been quite successful in discharging its responsibilities,
much more can be done to reinforce the effectiveness of
our common fight against sexual violence. We strongly
support, in that regard, the five-point priority agenda
carried out by Special Representative Zainab Bangura:
ending impunity, empowering women, mobilizing
political leadership, increasing recognition of rape as a
tactic and consequence of conflict and ensuring a more
coherent response from the United Nations system.
Those five elements represent fundamental goals that
are complementary and mutually reinforcing.

We should start to work towards the effectiveness
of our fight against sexual violence by making full
use of the existing tools - for instance, by ensuring
the deployment in relevant peacekeeping operations
of women's protection advisers, who will strengthen
the prevention and the response to sexual violence.
Many challenges have delayed the deployment of those
advisers, even when specifically requested by the
Council. That should not be acceptable. Constraints
in the establishment of peacekeeping missions should
not be at the expense of women's protection advisers,
especially if sexual violence has been identified as a
major concern in a conflict or post-conflict situation.

Anther promising tool at the disposal of Member
States that could be further engaged is the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. The lack of capacity at the national level to
investigate and prosecute sexual violence remains the
main obstacle to ensuring accountability, and leads to
the prevalence of impunity. It is, therefore, extremely
encouraging that a number of countries have already
requested technical cooperation from the Team to
respond promptly and effectively to conflict-related
sexual violence and to strengthen the capacity of
their national rule of law and justice actors. Portugal
commends the three United Nations entities - the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the United Nations Development Programme - for
their work in providing assistance in preventing and
addressing that form of violence.

Urgent action in another dimension of the broader
women, peace and security agenda will also have a
positive impact on our common fight against sexual
Violence. Indeed, the full and effective participation
of women in formal peace processes will allow
peacemakers to benefit fully from their knowledge
and experience. By empowering women and upholding
women's rights, we will also fight sexual violence more
efficiently.

Women are often - intentionally or by a lack of
security structures - placed at risk. It is striking that
sexual violence has been absent so often from peace
talks and peace agreements, including those that have
followed conflicts where sexual violence was a major
feature of the fighting. The Security Council and the
United Nations can, in general, play an important
role in changing that situation. Sexual violence needs
to be included in the definition of acts prohibited
by ceasefires, and needs to be reflected in specific
provisions of peace agreements related to security
arrangements and transitional justice.

In past years, some notable actions have been taken
to combat impunity at national and international levels.
Governments have prosecuted senior officers of their
armed forces for crimes of sexual violence, and leaders
of parties to armed conflict have been arrested and
transferred to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Subsequent verdicts of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone and the ICC constitute important landmarks of
international justice and demonstrate that accountability
for sexual violence is possible. They send a clear signal
to many parties to armed conflict throughout the world
that impunity is unacceptable. But they also send a
powerful signal to the victims of sexual violence that
no political or military leader is above the law. That
fundamental political message needs to be constantly
emphasized by the United Nations, and by the Security
Council, in particular.

I conclude this intervention with a word for the
victims and the survivors of sexual violence. There
is a need for recognition and reparation. There is a
crucial need to extend affordable and accessible health
services to survivors. Our aim is, certainly, to bring
the perpetrators of sexual Violence to justice; but also
to bring justice and adequate care to the survivors and
victims of such hideous crimes.

