Ms. Kofler (Germany): At the outset, I want to
point out that Germany aligns itself with the statements
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union
and the representative of Canada, the latter of whom
will be speaking on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security.

But let me first of all thank France for hosting
today's open debate, and especially for putting a
renewed focus on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.

1 would also like to thank the Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of UN-Women for their insightful briefings. I thank
Ms. Mina-Rojas for speaking about the participation of
women in the Colombian peace process. We also greatly
appreciate Ms. Jean's provision of practical examples
of women's leadership. It is very much welcomed that
the International Organization of La Francophonie is
participating in this debate.

Today's debate places a much welcome focus on
concerting action and commitments. I would like to
put forward four specific ideas on how we can step up
implementation ofthe agenda ofresolution 1325 (2000).

First, we need to support practical initiatives to
translate the rhetoric about women's participation in
peace processes into action. As the Executive Director
of UN-Women mentioned - and I want to thank her for
it - Germany has decided to back the African Union
in developing a network of African women leaders
that provides women leaders from across the continent
with a platform for exchange with respect to their
experiences. The network, launched in June in New
York, and is already producing results. Women leaders
from across Africa are starting to share experiences
about their respective activities and initiatives through
the network. Its next meeting will take place in Addis
Ababa next spring.

Germany fully backs the initiative led by Ghana
and the African Union to establish a Group of Friends
of the African Women Leaders Network in New York.
The network needs our political support, and the
Group can play an important role in that regard. We
also welcome the fact that, under the leadership of
the Deputy Secretary-General and the African Union
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, several
women leaders conducted their first joint African
Union-United Nations solidarity mission this summer,
to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that more such solidarity missions will follow
in future.

Secondly, we need to continue the international
discussion on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda between the annual open
debates. Spain has set up a network of capital-level
focal points on women, peace and security, and it is
encouraging to see that more than 60 countries from all
regions have appointed focal points. Germany will take
over the chairmanship of the network in 2018, followed
by Namibia in 2019, and we will host its next meeting,
in Berlin, next spring. We hope that many delegations
will be able to send a focal point to Berlin and use the
opportunity to continue today's discussion.

The Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security of the Security Council has become an
indispensable tool here in New York in keeping the
Council's attention on women and peace and security
between the open debates. It has alreay looked into
four specific situations in 2017. We commend Sweden,
Uruguay and the United Kingdom for their work in
leading that Group and encourage it to continue its
approach of looking at individual situations more than
once, thereby following up on implementation.

Thirdly, we can do better in linking up the
implementation of the Security Council's agenda on
women and peace and security with other agendas,
most important the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, but also the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. This
year, Germany adopted its second-generation national
action plan for the period 2017-2020, and we have tried
to emphasize some of the interlinkages. For instance,
in line with the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women general
recommendation No.30, our new action plan further
strengthens the qualitative involvement of civil society
organizations. Civil society representatives have
strongly contributed to our second action plan, and
we have created new consultation mechanisms for our
engagement with civil society.

Finally, we need to take specific action to prioritize
the implementation of the women and peace and
security in United Nations peacekeeping. Peacekeeping
missions need to have the necessary human-rights and
gender expertise. Having gender expertise integrated
into all mission components is not only nice to have,
but is at the core of mandate-implementation and
lasting peace and security. We therefore welcome
the Secretary-General's initiative to launch a United
Nations senior women talent pipeline.

However, as Member States, we must also do
more to inform, motivate and nominate women for
peacekeeping missions. Germany recently awarded five
female peacekeepers for their outstanding service in
peace operations. Their contributions to the success of
those missions are essential, whether as the captain of
the German frigate training the Lebanese Armed Forces
as part of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, or as the military officer overseeing
reconnaissance in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali or as human
resource officers in Colombia. We also provide
gender-sensitive and gender-specific training to third
countries, for instance in Accra, and support United
Nations police in their work to implement resolution
1325 (2000).

The Security Council's women and peace and
security agenda remains a priority for Germany in the
United Nations. The Council can count on Germany's
support in putting the rhetoric on women and peace and
security into action.

