Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, for having convened this meeting, and I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, Angela
King and Noeleen Heyzer for the lucid statements they
made yesterday.

Guatemala could not help but participate in a
debate on women and peace and security. In fact, an
important leader of my country's non-governmental-
organization community, Ms. Luz Mendez, participated
in the closed session the day before yesterday at which
the Security Council listened to diverse representatives
of non-governmental organizations who spoke on this
subject.

Indeed, as everyone here knows, in December
1996, under the aegis of the United Nations and a
group of friendly countries, the two parties that had
been battling one another during four decades of
fratricidal conflict put an end to this conflict by signing
a set of peace agreements. These accords endeavour to
address the major problems that were at the root of the
conflict. These problems include poverty,
marginalization, discrimination and a lack of
participation. The issue of the status of women and
their participation in the economic and social
development of the country appears throughout these
agreements as both a goal and a commitment.

By way of introduction, the tremendous
restrictions under which Guatemalan women have lived
since time immemorial could be mentioned. The
majority of the population lives in poverty. Women,
and especially those who are heads of households, are
among the most vulnerable members of the population.
Such women - and especially indigenous women
living in rural areas - have the highest levels of
illiteracy. Women have had to face particular obstacles,
including marginalization, a lack of opportunities,
discrimination and violence. This situation was
aggravated by the consequences of the internal armed
conflict, which brought with it death, disappearances,
uprooting and all types of hardships. Many families
were forced to leave their places of residence to seek
refuge in neighbouring countries or in regions of the
country far removed from the combat zones. The
number of widows and women heads of household
increased enormously.

For all of these reasons, when peace was agreed
upon, many Guatemalan women found themselves in a
situation of grave economic hardship and social
vulnerability. A broad and negotiated process of
reconciliation, resettlement and cooperation was
necessary, as was the healing of the deep physical and
psychological wounds of the war.

During the almost five years that have passed
since the signing of the Agreement on a Firm and
Lasting Peace progress has been made. This includes
the return and resettlement of displaced people, the
downsizing of the army, progress in the reform of the
judicial and educational systems and the establishment
of mechanisms to facilitate access to land.
Furthermore, specific measures were adopted to study
and analyse the situation of women and to design
strategies to improve it. This has been the role of the
women's forum and has led to the establishment of the
office of the advocate for indigenous women. In more
general terms, Guatemala today is a more open, more
plural and more participatory society than it was five
years ago. At the same time, there is much greater
public awareness than before about the need to deal
with injustice and inequity and to achieve deep
structural reforms, in both the economic and social
spheres, which are indispensable to bring about
sustainable peace.

In real terms, in recent years the participation of
women has grown in many fields. An increase in the
number of women involved in training programmes
and in community affairs can be seen. Women have
greater access to leadership positions and are taking
greater part in the electoral processes, as well as in
political and entrepreneurial activities, and not a few
now hold prominent positions in the country.
At the same time, a great deal remains to be done.
As Ms. Mendez pointed out the day before yesterday,
many of the commitments contained in the peace
agreements have not been fulfilled in the quick and
timely manner originally envisioned. It is obvious that
we are still far from achieving the goal contained in the
agreements - that is, to promote and effectively
facilitate the involvement of women in all areas of life,
at all levels, without discrimination of any kind.
Perhaps the complexity of what would follow was not
adequately foreseen, especially because the original
timetable of four years proved to be insufficient to deal
with the accumulation of the difficulties that we faced.
For this reason the oversight commission of the peace
process recently rescheduled compliance with the
commitments. Also for this reason, we hope that the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala will be extended to the end of 2003.

In conclusion, Guatemala has important
experiences to contribute to this discussion. I endorse
vigorously the recommendations that Ms. Mendez
presented the day before yesterday on the lessons that
have been learned from these experiences - lessons
that can be useful for other Member States of this
Organization.

