Ms. Mohammed: Let me begin by commending
Uruguay, and the Deputy Foreign Minister in
particular, for hosting this important event. I also salute
the Security Council for its work to combat sexual in
conflict, including through the recent adoption of
resolution 2331 (2016), which highlights the linkages
between conflict-related sexual violence, trafficking
in armed conflict and violence and extremism. Allow
me also to thank and welcome Ms. Mina Jaf of Iraq,
who is in the Chamber today to give voice to civil
society as a key partner and compass of our work at the
United Nations.

Today's debate takes place at a critical juncture.
On the one hand, the deep silence that has traditionally
shrouded crimes of sexual violence is finally breaking:
there is more visibility, more political will and more
momentum. Global understanding of this scourge is
increasing. Sexual violence in conflict is no longer
seen as merely a women's issue or a lesser evil in a
false hierarchy of human rights violations. Instead,
it is rightly viewed as a legitimate threat to security
and durable peace that requires an operational,
security and justice response, in addition to ensuring
multidimensional services for survivors of such crimes.

Secretary-General Antonio Guterres has placed
priority on prevention. The sexual violence in conflict
mandate - through the strategic leadership of
successive Special representatives, the engagement of
Member States and partnerships between the United
Nations family and civil society - shows how timely
and reliable information and analysis may be leveraged
for prevention.
A robust legislative framework now exists,
including a series of precise Security Council
resolutions that give us new tools to drive change and
progress. We are beginning to see some accountability
at the international and national levels. There is a
gradual shift from a reality in which it is cost free to
rape a woman, child or man in conflict to one where
there are consequences for anyone who commits,
commands or condones such crimes. We see greater
national ownership, leadership and responsibility. More
Governments are formally committing to take action.
Regional organizations are working in concert with the
United Nations to add to this effort. This is all much-
needed good news.

However, the truth is that we must confront the
deep roots of conflict-related sexual violence that lie
in fundamental inequality and discrimination against
women in all contexts. Too many women live with
the spectre of violence in their daily lives, in their
households and in their families. Armed conflict serves
only to exacerbate these prevailing conditions. These
circumstances have created an enabling environment
for widespread and systematic sexual violence in
conflict situations around the world, including in South
Sudan where it is a weapon of choice and a tactic of war
being used to terrorize and persecute populations.

As the report (S/2017/249) of Secretary-General
makes clear, we are also confronted by new challenges.
Sexual violence is increasingly used as a tactic of
terrorism, employed by extremist groups in places such
as Iraq, Yemen, Syria, Somalia, Nigeria and Mali to
advance their military, economic and ideological ends.
The same litany of horrors echoes across the accounts
of the Yazidi captives of Da'esh, Nigerian girls who
fled from Boko Haram, the tales of Somali women
liberated from Al-Shabaab and depictions of women's
lives in northern Mali under the extremist group Ansar
Eddine. These groups are using sexual violence for
strategic purposes. They are obscenely incentivizing
the recruitment of young men through the promise of
wives and sex slaves. They are outrageously boosting
profiting through the sale, trade and trafficking
of women and girls. It is therefore essential that
considerations of protecting and empowering women
and girls feature in our counter-terrorism and our
countering violent extremism architecture.

We face a number of major challenges going
forward. Enforcing compliance with international
law by non-State armed actors is one of them. The
Secretary-General has devoted specific attention to
enhancing the process of gaining concrete protection
commitments from parties listed annually in his reports
on sexual violence and children in armed conflict. Of
course, we face unprecedented political and operational
challenges, requiring the concerted effort and support
of Member States and the entire United Nations system.

The mass migration crisis and massive displacement
of populations due to protracted conflicts worldwide
has heightened the risk of sexual violence. We see the
acute vulnerability of refugees and internally displaced
persons not only within camps or settlements, but at
every stage of displacement, and how sexual violence
may be a significant factor driving vulnerable from
their homes and communities.

Let us also acknowledge that the response of
the United Nations is undermined by unacceptable
allegations and incidents of sexual abuse and
exploitation by peacekeepers. The Secretary-General
and all of us are determined to tackle this challenge
head on, as reflected in the recent report on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse (A/71/818), which outlines a strategy for making
zero tolerance a reality.

Sexual violence is a uniquely heart-wrenching
crime because victims, instead of the perpetrators,
often bear the stigma. Those who commit these
heinous crimes often escape justice. Meanwhile, their
victims are often forced to live with the shame of
having been raped and rejected by their families and
communities. Worst still, many children are born of
rape and sentenced to a life of discrimination, exclusion
and stigma. Mental health issues such as depression,
flashbacks, challenges in re-establishing intimate
relationships, and fear are some of the long-term
psychological consequences of this crime. Pregnancy
and sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS
and other health challenges, are common, and survivors
often find themselves doubly victimized.

Last week, I rejoiced with the people of Nigeria

and the world at the news of the release of 82 girls held
captive for the past three years by Boko Haram. The
girls were among a group of 270 schoolgirls kidnapped
in Chibok in April 2014. However, thousands are still
missing around the world and we must continue to insist
relentlessly on their return. It is not enough to bring
back our girls. We must bring them back with dignity
and respect to an environment of support, equality and
opportunity, and ensure that they are provided with
psychosocial counselling, emergency reproductive
health care and other critical assistance that helps them
reintegrate into their homes and societies.
Victims of conflict-related sexual violence also
have a right to comprehensive reparations. This is a
critical element of justice due to survivors, as well as
an important avenue for recovery. Social and economic
reintegration is imperative and must become a more
integral part of our reconstruction efforts, transitional
justice and post-conflict development frameworks.
This is also one of the core commitments articulated
in our Sustainable Development Goals, to empower
women and girls and eliminate all forms of violence
against them.

The Council has played a pivotal role in putting
us on a path towards accountability and the prevention
of sexual violence, but more is required if we are to
eradicate this crime once and for all. The Secretary-
General lays out comprehensive recommendations
in his report, including with regard to the Council's
support for engagement with parties to conflict to gain
concrete protection commitments and the accelerated
deployment of specialized personnel, such as women
protection advisers, which should catalyse the
implementation of this agenda on the ground, where it
matters most.

We have a solemn responsibility to convert a
centuries-old culture of impunity into a culture of
accountability and deterrence. We cannot afford to
be complacent or lose our focus. We must meet these
new challenges on the horizon, and we must keep
the international spotlight on this crime, which has
historically been left in the shadows. All our words,
laws and resolutions will mean absolutely nothing if
violations go unpunished in practice and if we fail in
our sacred duty of care to survivors.

In word and deed, let us commit to standing in
solidarity with survivors and vulnerable communities,
and replace horror with hope. This is a litmus test of
our commitment and responsibility to protect the most
vulnerable populations from the most egregious human
rights violations.

