Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the delegation of
the European Union (EU). I would like to make the
following comments in my national capacity.

We welcome this annual debate of the Security
Council on women and peace and security and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
welcome the report (S/2016/822) of the Secretary-
General.

One of my country's persistent concerns relates
to the implementation of this resolution in conflict-
affected territories. We all know that 20 per cent of
my country's territory remains under illegal foreign
military occupation and that hundreds of thousands
of Georgian internally displaced persons and refugees
who are victims of ethnic cleansing are denied the
right to return to their homes, while the fundamental
rights ofwomen and girls inside the occupied Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali regions in South Ossetia continue to
be neglected.

My Government spares no effort to develop and
implement higher standards for the full protection of
women's rights. We fully recognize the benefits of
enhancing women's leadership and participation in
decision-making in conflict resolution, prevention and
management processes. Our strong commitment is well
reflected our the national action plan on women and
peace and security, and Georgia was one of the first
countries to adopt a separate policy document on this
very important topic.

Georgia shares the view that effective conflict
prevention must start from an understanding of the
broad and deep insecurity that permeates women's lives
prior to conflict and the ways that pre-conflict structural
inequality can facilitate violence and insecurity, as
stated in the global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). At the same time, we need to
address the current challenges in peacekeeping in a
comprehensive and transparent way that acknowledges
the centrality of the protection of civilians. Georgia is
fully committed to a zero-tolerance policy against sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping and to ensuring
the full accountability of perpetrators, by responding to
alleged crimes in a survivor-centred manner.

It was precisely with that approach that the
Georgian Government and the Georgian armed forces
reacted immediately to the allegations voiced by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
January with regard to the sexual abuse cases involving
minors by members of foreign military forces in
the Central African Republic. Having condemned
any violence against local civilian populations, the
Georgian Government created an ad hoc inter-agency
investigation team, involving not only the representative
of the Office of the Prosecutor and the Minister of
Defence, but also experts on human rights and child
protection services, as well as psychologists.

The team established direct communication and
worked Closely with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the Executive Director of
UNICEF, the European Union Military Committee, as
well as the Legal Director of Medecins sans frontieres.
Georgia officially requested the engagement of all
the relevant parties in the investigation process by
assigning respective points of contact on the ground.
In June 2016, the team travelled to Bangui for the on
site phase of the investigation, conducting inquiries and
interviews with alleged victims in close cooperation
with the EU, MINUSCA and UNICEF. United Nations
agencies acknowledged that the team was highly
professional and exemplary.

Materials collected during the visit to the Central
African Republic are being carefully studied. So far,
preliminary investigation data reveal no sign ofGeorgian
soldiers' involvement in the crimes committed. Should
the results of the investigation prove them innocent,
Georgia would appreciate acknowledgement by the
relevant United Nations bodies.

We hope that the measures undertaken by my
Government that I mentioned will serve as an example
of best practice when it comes to a prompt and effective
response to cases of allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse. We also encourage other countries to do
the same as, we believe that only through such an
approach can we produce a sustained change in dealing
with the scourge of sexual exploitation and abuse in
conflict situations.

