Mr. Kemayah (Liberia): My delegation brings
warm greetings from His Excellency Mr. George
Manneh Weah, President of the Republic of Liberia,
and congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Security Council presidency for the month of April.
We commend the Security Council for its adoption
earlier today of resolution 2467 (2019), on sexual
Violence in conflict. Liberia is proud to have been one
of its sponsors.

We also want to reiterate our empathy and
sympathy for the Government and the people of Sri
Lanka and the families of the victims of the recent
tragic terrorist attacks.

We would like to thank the Security Council, under
Germany's presidency, for hosting this stimulating
debate and we thank the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the briefers for their inspiring
contributions, which truly reflect their unrelenting
efforts to end the use of sexual violence as a tactic of
warfare. On this tenth anniversary of the mandate of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the Government of Liberia would like to express its
appreciation for the constructive efforts that have been
undertaken under that mandate, including its assistance
to Liberia in our efforts to strengthen our national
legislation and our justice system's capacity.

The Government of Liberia remains resolute in its
ownership and leadership of the security and welfare
of its State and people. One of the peacebuilding
objectives of our new development framework, the Pro-
Poor Agenda for Prosperity and Development, aims
to sustain peace and promote social cohesion through
the increased participation of women in every area.
Regrettably, however, in an alarming phenomenon that
the Government of Liberia is very concerned about,
sexual violence is a persistent remnant of our period of
conflict. For many years women were excluded from
political and development processes, and a climate
of impunity for acts of sexual violence made matters
worse. Today we realize the importance of addressing
issues of impunity and accountability that impede
deterrence and prevention, as well as addressing the
root causes that fuel the recurrence of sexual violence.
The Government of Liberia is poised to embark on the
following objectives.

First, we will adopt our second national action plan
on women and peace and security and ensure budgetary
support for its implementation. Secondly, we will
reconstitute the national and county steering committees
to promote the localization of resolution 1325 (2000),
with a view to effectively raising awareness and
improving our national implementation of it. Thirdly,
we will establish gender units in nine ministries and
agencies to ensure the effective mainstreaming of
gender into their institutional frameworks. We will also
lobby and enhance our collaboration with the national
legislature to ratify the Optional Protocol to the United
Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms
of Discrimination Against Women, ensure the entry
into force of our domestic Violence bill and increase
women's access to landownership. With the effective
achievement of those objectives in View, the Government
of Liberia is collaborating with UN-Women, the United
Nations Development Programme, the International
Organization for Migration and non-governmental
organizations to implement a number of initiatives
on women's empowerment, the political engagement
of young people, justice and human rights and the
peaceful management of concession-related conflicts,
with support from the Peacebuilding Fund.

Today Liberia's iconic Peace Huts continue to be
a potent traditional mechanism for conflict mediation
and resolution and early-warning systems. We have
also received financing from the Peacebuilding Fund to
support the strengthening of participants' negotiation
and mediation skills. Dialogues in community Peace
Huts have focused on issues related to sexual and
gender-based violence, drug abuse, education, land
disputes, health services and illegal movements at
the borders.

Combating sexual violence requires a collaborative,
multi-stakeholder and multisectoral approach. The
Government of Liberia is committed to leveraging that
approach and remains grateful to the United Nations and
our development partners for their continued support
and assistance as we earnestly endeavour to ensure
that Liberia remains a secure country of inclusion and
equality for all.

