Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, let
me join others in commending you, Mr. President, for
having organized this open debate, which highlights
in particular the crucial role of women's civil society
organizations in contributing to the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict and peacebuilding.

We welcome the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/732), which reveals the lagging
participation of women in mediation efforts and
preventive diplomacy.

The slow progress made in ensuring the adequate
participation of women in peace talks and the inclusion
of women's and girls' rights in peace agreements
remains worrisome. Of the nine peace agreements
signed in 2012, only two contain provisions in that
regard - the same low percentage as in 2010. Peace
accords that fail to ensure the engagement of women in
post-conflict governance often neglect their access to
economic opportunities, justice and reparations.

When sexual violence is not addressed in the early
stages of mediation, such as in ceasefire agreements,
it usually remains ignored throughout the whole peace
process. We therefore call on the Security Council and
all relevant actors to increase efforts to promote women's
participation in peace negotiations and mediation and
to meet the specific concerns of women during post-
conflict reconstruction. The Security Council should
also, hand in hand with the General Assembly, address
the lack of women as lead peace mediators, including by
encouraging the Secretary-General to appoint women
to such positions and to ensure that adequate gender
expertise is provided in peace processes.

Women's civil society organizations are an
important asset in this regard. We must ensure that their
unique grass-roots perspective is taken into account
as we rethink how gender expertise is structured and
deployed in the United Nations system. My delegation
therefore welcomes the adoption of the presidential
statement, which highlights the important role of
women's civil society organizations in this area.

My delegation has long advocated for the consistent
mainstreaming of the Council's thematic agenda into
its country-specific work. A study recently published
by the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security reveals the inconsistency with which the
Council addresses women, peace and security concerns
in its decisions on country situations. We believe
that Council members should make greater efforts to
ensure that their country-specific experts receive the
information necessary to address those concerns in
relevant mission mandates.

To support such efforts, my delegation has undertaken
various initiatives. In partnership with Switzerland, we
supported the publication of a handbook on the women
and peace and security agenda by PeaceWomen. The
handbook has just been released in its second edition
and is available at the entrance to this Chamber. And
I am particularly pleased to inform the Council that
my delegation will launch, in close partnership with
the Liechtenstein Institute on Self-Determination at
Princeton University and with PeaceWomen, a series
of panel discussions dealing with different aspects of
the women and peace and security agenda. The first
such event at United Nations Headquarters will take
place on 12 December in Conference Room 1 at 3 p.m.
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, will speak there about the work of
the Court to prevent and prosecute sexual and gender-
based crimes.

