Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Mr. President, I
would first like to congratulate you and the delegation
of Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. My country and I are
also particularly grateful for your initiative to convene
this open debate on such an important issue.

We would also like to congratulate Ambassador
Susan Rice and the United States delegation on their
presidency last month - a truly remarkable month in
the history of the Security Council.
Today's meeting will allow us to continue the
review of the implementation of landmark resolution
1325 (2000). We would like to thank the delegation of
Viet Nam for its efforts, which resulted in the adoption
of resolution 1889 (2009) today. Furthermore, I would
like to express my gratitude to Deputy Secretary-
General Asha-Rose Migiro for her continued leadership
and commitment to gender equality and women's
participation. We are grateful for her statement today.

We are equally grateful for the valuable input of
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General,
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), Ms. Ines Alberdi. We were also very happy
to listen to the presentation by Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi
Amin from the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security.

Let me say at the outset that Austria fully aligns
itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, as well as with the statement that Costa Rica is
planning to make on behalf of the Human Security
Network.

We welcome the considerable progress that has
been made in strengthening the protection pillar of
resolution 1325 (2000) with the adoption of resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) on sexual violence, as
well as resolution 1882 (2009) on children and armed
conflict. Let me express our hope for a quick
appointment of the special representative requested in
resolution 1888 (2009). It is our understanding that this
new special representative to address sexual violence
in armed conflict will fully take into account the
important aspects of prevention on the one hand, and
women's participation, on the other, when carrying out
his or her mandate.

With the expansion of the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms in resolution 1882 (2009) to
situations where parties to armed conflict engage in
rape and other sexual violence against children, a
coherent and coordinated implementation of the
mandates of both the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the special representative to address sexual
violence in armed conflict will be crucial.

Progress is, however, also urgently needed on
other pillars of resolution 1325 (2000). Austria sees
great value in focusing this debate on responding to the
needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations for
sustainable peace and security. Investing in women
means investing into the future, and ensuring women's
and girls access to education is one of the cornerstones
of their empowerment.

No society can afford not to make full use of
women's potential contribution to peacebuilding and
post-conflict recovery. Resolution 1325 (2000) rightly
places women at the heart of consideration of the issue,
and not merely as victims, but as agents of change and
partners on an equal footing in peace negotiations.

Nevertheless, women continue to be largely
excluded from decision-making processes. We thank
UNIFEM. for presenting us with a study that clearly
demonstrates, among others things, how the complete
absence of women from peace negotiations and post-
conflict planning processes results in serious neglect of
the needs of women and girls in the phase of early
recovery. As a consequence, this negligence imposes
serious costs on recovery, undermining efforts to reassert
the rule of law and restart the economy. We need to
commit ourselves to addressing women's priorities in a
more consistent manner in the daily work of the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.

Austria will continue to advocate for an increase
in the number of women appointed to senior United
Nations positions both at Headquarters and, in
particular, in field missions. We highly welcome the
efforts of the Secretary-General in this regard. Having
three female special representatives and six deputy
special representatives serving in missions in various
conflict areas is already a major step ahead. We hope to
see this positive trend continue and urge all special
representatives and envoys to make full use of the
potential of women in peace processes, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding.

We further request the Secretary-General to take
concrete steps to enhance the efficiency of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs (DPA) to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), in particular by creating the
posts of full-time senior gender advisers in DPA and
within DPA's Mediation Support Unit.

Austria is committed to the objectives of
resolution 1325 (2000). Our activities are firmly based
on a national action plan adopted in August 2007. A
working group made up of representatives of all
ministries involved and the Austrian Development
Agency reports annually to the Council of Ministers on
measures undertaken under this action plan. Gender
and human rights training have been included more
systematically in the predeployment training of police
and military personnel participating in peacekeeping
operations. Additionally, Austria, together with
UNIFEM, supports women's networks in the western
Balkans and preparatory work for national action plans
in the region.

Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). This opportunity
should be used to define future priorities and to
identify how to address the remaining and new
challenges in fully implementing resolution 1325
(2000). A set of global indicators, as called for in the
resolution adopted today, will complement this
important work.

Austria is planning to continue its financial
contributions to UNIFEM. for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We also plan to host an experts
meeting in Vienna in the first half of 2010.

We welcome the Secretary-General's positive
reply to a letter sent in August 2008 by women leaders,
including Austria's then-Foreign Minister Ursula
Plassnik. We are satisfied with and grateful for his
support in organizing a ministerial-level meeting in
2010 to review the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). My country stands ready to work with the
Secretary-General and all interested countries and
stakeholders to use this tenth anniversary to identify
gaps and challenges and to reinforce the commitment
of all States, the entire United Nations system and
regional organizations to effectively implementing the
undertakings of resolution 1325 (2000).

