Ms. Sison (United States of America): Thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today's debate. We
appreciate greatly the remarks and leadership of Special
Representative Zainab Bangura and Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin on the critical issue of combatting sexual
violence in conflict.

Fifteen years ago this October, the Security Council
acknowledged the critical importance of women in the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
October the Council will convene at the ministerial
level to take stock of our progress over the past 15 years
and determine a way forward.

As we look ahead to the high-level review in
October, today's debate can be seen as an opportunity
to assess the progress made and the challenges ahead
of us related to protection against conflict-related
sexual violence. As we know from experience, women
and children are disproportionately affected by such
Violence, and the use of sexual violence as a tool of
war too often serves to marginalize women and
obstruct their participation in peace processes. Over
the past several years, the international community has
galvanized around this issue, denouncing the culture of
impunity surrounding sexual violence and supporting
judicial and legal reforms among other interventions.

We have seen progress in that regard, but there
is much more that remains to be done. Special
Representative Bangura has demonstrated admirable
leadership in tackling this difficult issue head on. Her
personal efforts, along with those of many individuals
here today, have already resulted in significant changes
in the way we approach conflict-related sexual violence.
Women leaders have been dynamic agents for change in
combating sexual violence, and we are inspired by their
work around the world. They not only support survivors
in their work, but also promote prevention, recovery
and resilience through efforts that champion women's
active participation in decision-making in society. They
are women such as Landy, a 28-year-old law student
in Haiti, who volunteered with a Unites States-funded
programme and has since committed herselfto using the
law as an important tool for preventing violence, and Sri
Lankan peace activist Shreen Saroor, who, through her
non-governmental organization, has fostered critical
grass-roots peacebuilding and reconciliation activities
and provided essential support for survivors of sexual
violence. And in the Central African Republic, our
efforts to support survivors' recovery through economic
empowerment are intricately tied to ensuring the future
safety and protection of those courageous women.

Across the world we are working with women
through leadership programmes, small grants and
professional training to demand better, safer lives
through legislation that protects the rights of women
and men from gender-based violence. Unfortunately,
there are severe gaps in many local justice systems and
international accountability that must be remedied in
order to hold all perpetrators accountable.

At the June 2014 Global Summit to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict, representatives from over
120 different countries committed to strengthening
accountability. They agreed that the way forward
must include capacity-building and a focus on the
rule of law in order to create a sustainable and secure
system of justice. The United States unveiled its new
accountability initiative at the June Summit, which
supports specialized justice sector mechanisms and
reflects our commitment to move sexual violence out
of the shadows and into the sphere of justice.

However, we must not forget that we have come a
long way. In the period since the Council took up the
issue of conflict-related sexual violence in resolution
1820 (2008), many Member States have made significant
strides, as demonstrated by the Secretary-General's
recent report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2015/203). Ofthe five States cited as having security
forces suspected of committing or being responsible
for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict that are on the Security
Council's agenda, four have committed to adopting
specific measures to address conflict-related sexual
violence.

Unsurprisingly, the Syrian armed forces, intelligence
services and pro-Government forces stand apart
from international norms in that regard. Among the
violations faced by Syrians daily are reports of sexual
Violence against women, men, girls and boys in flight,
house searches, checkpoints and, especially, detention.

A significant challenge also lies in curtailing the
violence and crimes of non-State actors, such as Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
also known as Daesh. These groups utilize conflict-
related sexual Violence not only to terrorize women and
children, but as a war tactic to suppress opposition and
punish those whose beliefs differ. Sexual and gender-
based Violence has become an ingrained aspect of their
overall strategy for controlling territory, destroying the
social fabric and recruiting new supporters.

Yesterday marked the one-year anniversary of the
kidnapping of 276 girls from Chibok in Nigeria and,
heartbreakingly, as Ms. Allamin has just reported, their
fates remain, for the most part, unknown. Boko Haram's
gross violence against women and girls - abduction
and rape, often exercised under the cover of false
terms, such as "marriage", or the use of girls as suicide
bombers * is a symbol of its toxic ideology. In Iraq,
the devastating plight of minority communities rocked
by ISIL, especially the sexual slavery faced by women
and girls, is a call to action.

As so compellingly detailed by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bangura, the
tools at the disposal of the international community
require further refinement in the approach to non-State
actors. The threat ofprosecution, while necessary, does
not, by itself, deter groups like Boko Haram or ISIL, nor
are such groups necessarily responsive to international
censure. Consequently, we must consider stronger,
more innovative and more aggressive approaches to
address the use of sexual violence by those groups.
I invite the United Nations Secretariat and the
international community to think thoroughly about that
challenge and to join us in New York in October with a
renewed commitment to stopping the sexual predations
committed by non-State actors.

We also applaud the Secretary-General for including
in his report the disproportionate and unique impact
of sexual violence on the lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender (LGBT) community. Pre-existing political
disenfranchisement, social exclusion and violence
against LGBT individuals intensifies in situations
of conflict, often with complete impunity. Where
individuals are targeted for conflict-related sexual
violence based on their real or perceived identity, it is not
only appropriate but necessary for the United Nations
and the international community to identify ways to
halt such predation. We must protect all people from
the crimes of sexual violence and improve measures to
protect those most at risk. Preventing sexual violence
is not about politics. It is about our common humanity
and about respect. We must all stand united in taking
urgent action to combat sexual violence in conflict and
in reaching out to support survivors around the world.

