Mr. Juwayeyi (Malawi): Those of us who are not
in the Security Council do not get an opportunity to
congratulate a delegation for assuming the presidency
of the Council, so it gives me particular pleasure this
morning to congratulate you, Mr. President, and I am
most grateful that during your presidency you have
taken the initiative to hold this open session on women
and peace and security.

My Government attaches great importance to the
protection and security of women and girls, both in
situations of armed conflict and in peace. Wars and
armed conflict bring untold suffering and misery to
communities and nations, for they entail devastating
and horrific levels of violence and brutality, employing
any possible means. Today's wars and conflicts make
little distinction between soldiers and civilians and
between adults and children. Currently, most of the
wars and conflicts take place in developing countries,
where most of the population lives in rural areas.
Often, these conflicts are within countries, rather than
across borders. Women and children constitute a
disproportionate number of the affected populations
and, therefore, suffer the brunt of violence and
brutality.

Armed conflict affects women and girls
differently from men and boys. During armed conflict,
not only are women and girls killed, maimed, abducted,
separated from their loved ones, subjected to
starvation, malnutrition and forced displacement, but
they are also continually threatened with rape,
domestic violence, sexual exploitation and slavery,
trafficking, sexual humiliation and mutilation. Rape
and sexual violence perpetrated by the armed forces,
whether governmental or other actors, including in
some instances peacekeeping personnel, increases the
potential for spreading HIV/AIDS and other sexually
transmitted diseases. No wonder most of the
HIV/AIDS victims in the developing countries are
women and girls. HIV/AIDS leaves millions of
children orphaned and, in most cases, the responsibility
to care for them rests largely on the shoulders of older
people.

All of these harmful and widespread threats to
women and girls have long-term consequences for
durable peace, security and development. The sad thing
is that in most instances the women do not know why
the wars and armed conflicts erupt, owing to the fact
that they are either under-represented or not
represented at all at the decision-making levels.

My Government applauds and thanks the
Secretary-General, the United Nations bodies and
agencies, non-governmental organizations,
international agencies and donor countries for the
efforts they have made to protect and secure peace and
security for women and girls. Various international
legal instruments, particularly the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
the corresponding Optional Protocols, have been
adopted by the General Assembly. International
Criminal Tribunals have been established for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, and these have
made great strides to help end impunity for crimes
against women and girls. Forms of sexual violence are
now included as a war crime in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. Beyond its emergency
relief responsibilities, the United Nations has
increasingly become involved in efforts aimed at
peacekeeping, peace-making and peace-building. It is
gratifying to note that the Security Council, even
though it has taken five decades to do so, has now
recognized the importance of women's role and of their
increased participation in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peace-building.

However, there is still a lot more that needs to be
done. Appropriate solutions cannot be achieved if
women are left out of the decision-making machinery.
You are aware, Mr. President, that women continue to
be under-represented in all peacekeeping, peace-
making and peace-building efforts, including in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the United
Nations. This should not be allowed to continue.

In the long term however, the only way to truly
ensure the protection and security of women and girls
is to prevent wars and armed conflicts from taking
place. Major root causes of most of the recent wars and
armed conflicts have included poverty and lack of
respect for human rights. These ills must be addressed
first. My delegation recalls that, at the end of the
Millennium Summit, world leaders pledged to
eradicate poverty and make the right to development a
reality for everyone. This means promoting equality
between men and women in decision-making. This
further means the involvement and full participation of
women in all issues, including peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peace-building, as well as at the
negotiating table, from the grassroots level to the
decision-making levels.

My delegation requests the Secretary-General and
the Security Council to urge Member States to ensure
that training in human rights and peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peace-building includes everyone -
civilians, soldiers, the police, civil society, the women
themselves and peacekeeping personnel. Those who
commit crimes against women, including the
peacekeeping personnel, should be brought to book.

Let us heed the women's cry for an equal
opportunity to voice their ideas in official peace
negotiations. And let us act now.

