The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Canada, El Salvador, Fiji, Guatemala, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Japan, Kenya, Liechtenstein,
Mali, Mexico, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Republic of Korea, South
Africa, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic and the United
Republic of Tanzania in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Ms. Louise Arbour, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Thoraya Ahmed
Obaid, Executive Director of the United Nations
Population Fund, Ms. Agathe Rwankuba, Legal
Advisor to the Women's Network for the Protection of
Human Rights and Peace, and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer,
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women.

It is so decided.
If I may, at this stage, welcome and salute the
presence with us of the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.

I invite Mr. Guehenno, Ms. Arbour and
Ms. Obaid to take their seats at the Council table.

I invite Ms. Rwankuba and Ms. Heyzer to take
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 22 October 2004 - this could
only happen under these circumstances - from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to
the United Nations, requesting that Ms. Elsie
Bernadette Onubogu, Permanent Observer of the
Commonwealth Secretariat at the United Nations, be
invited to participate in the open debate of the Security
Council, in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. Onubogu to take a seat at the side of
the Council chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Carmen Moreno,
Director of the United Nations International Research
and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Moreno to take a seat at the side of
the Council chamber.

The Council will now begin its consideration of
the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations. Members of the Council have before
them document S/2004/814, containing the report of
the Secretary-General entitled, "Women and peace and
security".

I should like to draw the attention of the members
to document S/2004/862, containing a letter from
Jordan, South Africa, Sweden and the United
Kingdom, transmitting the report of the Conference on
Gender Justice in Post-conflict Situations.

At this morning's meeting, the Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Guehenno, Ms. Arbour and
Ms. Obaid, and this afternoon, by Ms. Rwankuba and
Ms. Heyzer.

It is very good to see so many distinguished
guests and speakers, a visible demonstration of the
support of the United Nations system, as a whole, for
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). That
resolution marked a turning point in the work of the
Security Council. For the first time, the Council looked
beyond the political and the military dimensions of
peace and security and specifically addressed the rights
of those most affected by conflict.

Crucially, the resolution not only recognized the
disproportionate affect of conflict on women, but it
also underlined the essential contribution that they
make to prevent conflict and maintain peace.
Resolution 1325 (2000) tasked the United Nations
system and its Member States to ensure that gender
considerations are thoroughly integrated into all
aspects of United Nations peace and security work,
from conflict prevention to post-conflict
reconstruction.

In addition to the increased participation of
women, resolution 1325 (2000) also addresses the very
urgent need of providing protection to women in
conflict situations because, as we all know, it is women
and children who suffer disproportionately in armed
conflict and constitute the majority of all victims.

There has been growing international recognition
in recent years of gender-based violence in conflict
situations. Incidents of such violence continue at a
frightening rate. As we start this debate, I can do no
better than note what the Secretary-General said in his
wake-up address to the African Union when gender
was discussed in Addis Ababa on 6 July this year.
Mr. Kofi Annan said on that occasion,

"In parts of the Democratic Republic of Congo
and in the Darfur region of the Sudan, gender-
based violence has reached almost epidemic
proportions. Every effort must be made to halt
this odious practice and bring the perpetrators to
justice."

Who can quarrel with those words? I hope this meeting
provides a clear demonstration of the collective resolve
to actually confront the realities of this issue.

I give the floor to the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno.


