Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and his work for gender parity. I also thank the Bolivian
presidency for convening today's open debate on an
agenda that is ever more relevant since the adoption of
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) 18 years ago. I thank
the briefers for their statements and their outstanding
commitment. I also congratulate Ethiopia for voting its
first-ever woman President into office, and I wish her
the best of luck.

Throughout my life, I have sadly witnessed many
wars in my country, Lebanon, at first hand. That has
enabled me to understand what an important factor
women are in achieving peace, maintaining security,
rebuilding countries, healing nations' deepest wounds
and reinventing hope when it seems impossible ever to
dream of it again. It also helped me understand that in
situations of conflict and war, women and girls suffer
disproportionately and in the ugliest and most abhorrent
ways. In war, their gender becomes their misfortune,
and when the guns go silent, they are the forgotten ones.

There can be no peace, at least no durable peace,
when half of society is excluded from its processes.
There can be no security, at least no sustainable
security, when it is achieved by discounting women's
vital participation and inclusive engagement. There can
be no future, in fact no present, when women's voices
go unheard or unheeded. Ignoring those voices and
overlooking their aspirations impairs the possibility
of lasting peace everywhere in the world. Progress has
been made, but it has been terribly slow. Nowhere is
that more true than in peace negotiations and processes.
I am sure that everyone here has heard only too many
times today the stunning statistic that only 2 per cent of
the mediators in formal peace processes between 1990
and 2017 were women. Even here at the United Nations,
it was not until 2013 that the first appointment of a
woman as a Special Envoy - Ms. Mary Robinson- was
made. Women in conflict-ridden countries consider
Security Council resolutions on peace processes to be
gender-insensitive. A few resolutions have begun to
incorporate a gender perspective and to demand the
real participation and inclusion of women at every level
of negotiations. We need more of them. We also need
to see more women peace envoys in this Chamber and
around the world, especially as that is in line with the
Secretary-General's vision.

Lebanon remains firmly committed to an inclusive
approach to the women and peace and security agenda.
During Lebanon's parliamentary elections in May, a
record number of women registered as candidates on
the ballot. Although the results brought only six hard-
won victories, they nonetheless showed that women
are as invested as men in political dynamics and the
future of the country. The leadership in Lebanon is
responsive and is working to empower women. Prime
Minister-designate Saad Hariri, who was the first to
appoint women Ministers in his previous Cabinets, is
committed to appointing them for his next Cabinet. He
promised that women would play a significant role in
the new Government and said that if the country had
been handed over to women, we would be in a much
better and more pleasant place today.

The National Commission for Lebanese Women
was mandated by the Council of Ministers to hold
six consultations between April and July 2018, which
translated into the country's first national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000) and is expected to be endorsed
by the upcoming Cabinet upon its formation. We are
also seeing more active participation by women at all
levels of governance and in key positions. There has
been a qualitative leap in that direction in the security
sector, and the Lebanese army is drawing up a strategic
plan aimed at ensuring gender parity.

However, in Lebanon as in other parts of the
world, implementation gaps continue to hinder the
full achievement of the women and peace and security
agenda. Gender barriers, the result of social gender
stereotypes and patriarchal attitudes, still exist. We
need to address such gaps through a comprehensive
legal approach in order to close them. Tangible efforts
should be made to prevent and eliminate all forms of
discrimination and violence against women and girls
from both public and private life. That should and must
include peace and security processes at all levels.

Eighteen years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, the time is
ripe for the real and irrevocable materialization of its
agenda. Women see gender equality as their last battle.
That battle requires that we all fight together, shoulder
to shoulder, as women try to remake a world where
peace is possible and where security is within reach.
That battle is inevitable, not only because morally it is
the right thing to do, but because factually it is the only
way out and because we will not give up. As Secretary-
General Guterres said, women will not give up.

