Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Swedish
presidency for organizing this timely meeting on peace
and security in Africa with a focus on the women and
peace and security agenda. We also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Amina Mohammed, and the African
Union Special Envoy, Bineta Diop, for their briefings
and their commitment drawing attention to this issue.

Bolivia reiterates the vital importance of
promoting United Nations cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations for the implementation
and follow-up of the agenda on women and peace and
security. In that understanding, we commend the high-
level mission led by the Deputy Secretary-General,
together with the African Union, to the Sahel region,
the Lake Chad basin and South Sudan. We encourage
the continuation of such practices, as they enhance the
importance of women's participation in peace, security
and development processes and in the fight against
sexual violence in conflict.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), 18
years ago, the Security Council has recognized the
fundamental link between respect for gender equality
and international peace and security. Since then, the
United Nations has led great efforts and made significant
progress in implementing Security Council resolutions
to effectively integrate the gender perspective into
peace processes and to ensure the participation of
women in them. However, despite those efforts, the
implementation of the agenda on women and peace
and security continues to face challenges that require
the joint work of States, regional organizations, United
Nations agencies and the international community as
a whole.

With regard to the Sahel, the consequences of
interventionism and regime-change policies in Libya
in 2011 had the direct effect of destabilizing the
region, causing deplorable results still present today,
such as the growing instability and insecurity due
to the presence of terrorist groups and violent armed
groups and transnational crime that affects the entire
population, but especially women and girls, who are
victims of sexual violence. We must remember that
terrorist groups use sexual violence not only as a
weapon of war but also as a source of funding and a
means of recruitment.

We recognize the increase in the participation of
women in the security sector and national counter-
terrorism bodies. However, the consolidation of a
comprehensive and gender-sensitive approach involving
each and every one of the stakeholders is still a long way
off. We consider it vital to promote the implementation
of the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel 2018-
2022 and the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel and their priorities, which include gender
equality and the empowerment of women to improve
security, governance and resilience in the Sahel.

Moreover, in the Lake Chad basin, the practices of
Boko Haram and Da'esh, such as kidnappings, forced
marriages, rape, prostitution and the use of girls as human
bombs, cannot continue and must not go unpunished.
As resolution 2349 (2017) indicates, a holistic approach
is needed to combat those terrorist groups. We welcome
the efforts of the Joint Multinational Task Force in the
fight against Boko Haram, and especially the efforts of
the countries in the region in creating national action
plans on women and peace and security. It is necessary
to support that type of initiative, encourage cooperation
among the countries that make up the special force
and avoid interference in internal affairs that could
destabilize the region.

We must also express our concern about reports
of the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war by
armed forces or groups in South Sudan. We believe
that to make the needs of women and girls visible, their
participation in the peace process is vital. The role ofthe
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
as mediator during the Revitalization Forum helps
to ensure an inclusive process that enables women's
participation through civil society organizations. We
commend IGAD's efforts and call on the Council to
continue to support the ongoing dialogue process.

In the same vein, we must intensify our efforts
to ensure that women have a relevant place in the
prevention, negotiation, mediation and peacebuilding
processes. The creation of societies that promote gender
equity makes peace processes inclusive and leads to
sustainable peace. As long as women are not primary
actors in the decision-making processes of conflict
resolution, we will not achieve real peace.

We must fight impunity. Sexual violence in conflict
is a war crime, and we must use the mechanisms
available to us to bring the perpetrators to justice. We
must support national authorities in the fight against
sexual violence, in developing capacities for the
prosecution of perpetrators and in ensuring access to
basic services such as health and education. We must
foster economic empowerment, which is necessary
in post-conflict reconstruction. Promoting women's
economic independence would make it possible
to eliminate existing inequalities and would make
sustainable development possible.

Finally, it is clear that the Organization has an
important system in place to meet the global goals for
gender equality and for the implementation of the agenda
on women and peace and security. We must continue
to promote the resolutions adopted by the Council
on this subject with the cooperation of the offices at
our disposal. In that understanding, we commend the
work of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security and, of course, UN-
Women, which do a great job in promoting the role of
women in the quest for peace.
