Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico would like to express its
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for the holding of what
is now a traditional open debate on women and peace
and security. We also wish to thank the Secretary-
General for introducing his recent report (S/2008/622).

Gender equality and the prevention, punishment
and eradication of violence against women and girls
are State policy in Mexico. They also constitute
essential elements of my country's foreign policy in the
promotion of international peace and security. The
Secretary-General's report reflects the increasing
significance of the topic and stresses the need for
progress in improving the protection of the human
rights of women.

It is clear that there has been some progress since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). However, we
must once again admit that there is a gap between the
normative frameworks arising from the adoption of the

resolution and its effective implementation, as the
Secretary-General clearly notes. Mexico therefore
welcomes the package of measures that the Secretary-
General suggests in order to accelerate the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), particularly
in ensuring that women's needs and concerns are
included in the development of conflict prevention
strategies and early warning measures.

Women are not passive actors in complex
situations or emergencies and are especially vulnerable
to marginalization and poverty and their associated
psychological and physical violence. In that context,
Mexico welcomes the Secretary-General's proposal to
strengthen the capacity of the Security Council to
eradicate sexual violence by dispatching missions to
assess situations in which sexual violence has taken
place or its use is encouraged as a tactic of war or as
part of a widespread or systematic campaign against
civilians. We would also deem it appropriate for the
Council to consider implementing the recommendation
to intensify measures to prevent and eradicate sexual
violence, including through more systematic
operational and tactical responses by United Nations
peacekeeping operations and humanitarian assistance
programmes.

We agree with the Secretary-General's proposal
that the Council should reiterate that parties to armed
conflict have a responsibility to protect women and to
prevent and eradicate sexual violence. We reiterate the
need to sensitize and train the military personnel of
Member States and United Nations peacekeeping and
humanitarian assistance personnel on the importance of
human rights with a gender component.

Mexico would like to express its concern at the
increasing number of cases of sexual abuse perpetrated
against women during armed conflict, including during
the peacebuilding phase. We agree with the Secretary-
General on the fact that sexual violence is a security
problem requiring a systematic response commensurate
with its scale and magnitude.

It is imperative to take effective measures to
prevent and respond to widespread or systematic acts
of sexual violence in order to contribute to
international peace and security, as well as to intensify
efforts to implement a zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008).

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was the

result of the political will of Council members to

provide protection for the millions of women affected

by armed conflicts. A permanent and strong willingness

to translate that commitment into concrete action is
required.

In that regard, Mexico supports the Secretary-
General's position on the issue of the Security Council
increasing its use of the Arria Formula or similar
arrangements for informal consultations with women's
groups and non-governmental organizations on
individual conflict situations. That would undoubtedly
allow progress to be made in the practice, treatment
and promotion of positive solutions in specific cases
that deserve the attention of the international
community.

