Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Russian Federation for organizing today's
open debate on the topic "Women and peace and
security: implementing the common agenda". I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Executive
Director Mlambo-Ngcuka for their briefings. I also
listened carefully to the briefings delivered by the
representatives of civil society.

Thanks to the common efforts of Member States,
United Nations organs and regional organizations,
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
on women and peace and security has recently made
progress. The international community has undertaken
comprehensive efforts to protect women's security,
safeguard their rights and interests and push for a
greater role for women on peace and security. Those
efforts have resulted in progress. At the same time,
the international security situation remains complex
and grave, with the frequent occurrence of regional
conflicts. In some countries and regions, the threats of
terrorism and violent extremism are on the rise. And
women, being a vulnerable group in that regard, bear
the brunt of such violence. The international community
should closely coordinate and cooperate in providing
assistance and comprehensively enhancing the all-
round protection of women in conflict situations. I wish
to emphasize the following points.

First, the political settlement of regional hot-spot
issues needs to be promoted so as to create a favourable
external environment for the protection of women's
rights and interests. The international community
should advocate the concepts of win-win cooperation
and peaceful development, assist the countries
concerned, advance political settlements and national
reconciliation and promote dialogue and consultations
as ways of resolving differences and of ensuring that
women are spared the impact of conflicts and are
able to enjoy a peace dividend. The full participation
of women in decision-making needs to be ensured at
all stages of peace processes so that they can leverage
their unique advantages and act as a positive force in
peacemaking.

Secondly, comprehensive economic and social
development needs to be promoted in order to provide
a sound basis for women's empowerment. The
international community should help the countries
concerned in carrying out post-conflict reconstruction
by supporting them in enhancing capacity-building
so as to promote economic and social development
and better protect women's rights and interests. The
international community should actively provide
development assistance and technical support to
developing countries to help them promote gender
equality and women's empowerment, and at the same
time guide women's groups and civil society so that they
can play a positive and constructive role in that respect.

Thirdly, cooperation among the various organs
of the United Nations should be promoted to generate
synergies aimed at protecting women in conflict
situations. The Security Council should fully shoulder
its primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, accord priority to issues related
to women and peace and security and strengthen
coordination with the relevant organs, including the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission and UN-Women. As
part of that process, the various organs of the United
Nations should fully utilize existing mechanisms and
improve their efficiency, and, at the same time, place
strong emphasis on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in protecting women in conflicts.

Fourthly, attention must be given to combating
sexual violence in conflicts in order to effectively
protect the legitimate rights and interests of women.
The international community should pay close attention
to the heinous acts ofterrorists and extremists violating
women and aggressively combat such actions. The
international community should also pay attention to the
leading role of the countries concerned and help them
to comprehensively implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and enhance their ability to combat
sexual violence. The international community should
respond appropriately to terrorist threats, advance
international counter-terrorism cooperation and take
comprehensive measures to protect women from
terrorist and extremist forces.
In September last year, China and the United
Nations j ointly sponsored the Global Summit on Women.
Chinese President Xi Jinping and representatives from
more than 140 countries, including approximately 80
Heads of State or Government, attended the Summit. The
Summit forged an international consensus, with world
leaders recommitting themselves to implementing the
outcome of the Beijing World Conference on Women.
That will have a major and profound impact on the
global women's cause. President Xi Jinping announced
at the Summit China's new commitments in support of
the development of the global women's cause, including
contributing to UN-Women and providing assistance to
developing countries. Those commitments demonstrate
China's firm resolve and practical action in its
commitment to the healthy development of the global
women's cause. China is making comprehensive efforts
to implement those commitments.

In May, the 2016 Chinese presidency of the Group
of 20 (G-20) held the Women 20 Meeting in Xi'an,
under the theme "Equal participation and innovative
development", in an effort to push for equal participation
of women in economic development and global
governance, as well as for improvement in women's
economic empowerment. China is willing to work
together with the rest of the international community
to continue to push for the implementation of the goals
regarding women and peace and security and to make
tireless efforts towards further progress in the global
women's cause.

