Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you so
very much, Madam President, for personally presiding
over this open debate.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statements to be delivered by the representative of
Canada, on behalf of 55 Member States, and on behalf
of the European Union.

We are on the eve of the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Calling for the
full and effective implementation of all elements of this
very important women and peace and security agenda
could not be more important. This year's report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2019/800) is very clear on that point. We simply
cannot lower our guard. We need to stand together to
ensure that the women and peace and security agenda
is not weakened by compromising on agreed language,
especially on sexual and reproductive health and rights.

In this statement, I will highlight three aspects
of this agenda: first, women human rights defenders;
secondly, the survivor-centred approach; and thirdly,
our commitment to implementation.

On my first point, women's organizations and
women human rights defenders play key roles in
promoting peace and security at multiple levels. We
are deeply concerned that, on the whole, violence
against them is rising. For instance, in Colombia in
the first half of 2019, 447 threats, 20 homicides and
13 homicide attempts against women leaders, human
rights defenders and peacebuilders were recorded.
We need to ensure across the world that women rights
defenders are protected and can do their crucial work
without interference and without fearing for their lives.

My second point is the importance of a survivor-
centred approach. When it comes to protection against
conflict-related sexual violence, it is essential to adopt
a survivor-centred approach, to listen to survivors and
to respect their dignity, their rights and their wishes.
Survivors should be the drivers of their own personal
recovery process. They should be provided support in
the form of information and comprehensive services,
including those related to sexual and reproductive
health and rights. In addition, they should have access
to mental health and psychosocial support. International
humanitarian and human rights law should, of course,
be respected

My third point concerns our commitment to
implementation. We need to go beyond words. The gap
between our commitments and their implementation
remains wide - too wide. That is something we all
have to take responsibility for. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is committed to the full implementation
of all elements of the women and peace and security
agenda. We will make use of next year's momentum to
develop our fourth national action plan, with enhanced
accountability and a stronger national pillar. Moreover,
starting in 2021, we will double our funding for women,
peace and security. Furthermore, we will continue our
efforts to enhance the meaningful participation of
women in peace processes and to increase the number of
uniformed women in peacekeeping missions, including
in leadership roles.

In conclusion, let me quote Leymah Gbowee, the
Liberian women's rights advocate and celebrated Nobel
Peace Prize laureate, who said that we have the power
to stop war and to "turn our upside-down world right-
side up". We agree. All of us have that power. All the
necessary elements are present in the comprehensive
agenda that is the women and peace and security
agenda. Now we, collectively, need to do our utmost to
achieve its full implementation.

