Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): This open
debate is yet another expression of your personal
commitment, Mr. President, as well as that of your
delegation, to gender issues on the United Nations
agenda. We would like to thank you for that. We are
also grateful to those who have made presentations this
morning, and particularly to Ms. Angela King, the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women.

As many others, we welcomed resolution 1325
(2000) as a landmark achievement of the Security
Council and believe that it has already made a
significant difference in work on the ground. There is
therefore good momentum, and this debate is an
opportunity to move the process forward.

An approach based on participation seems crucial
to us in order to advance work in the broad area of
women and armed conflict. It is essential to realize that
women are players and participants in armed
conflicts - not merely victims - and that they must
be treated as such. Their roles range from providers
and heads of households to peacemakers, and, indeed,
they can also be combatants and agents of Violence. It
is therefore obvious that women must be included in all
stages of peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-
building. Women's role in post-conflict peace-building
is particularly of the essence, and we continue to look
forward to the establishment of a peace-building unit
within the Department of Political Affairs, which could
have a great impact in this respect. We remain
committed to financially supporting such a peace-
building unit, not least against this background.

When the necessity to include women in all these
processes seems clear, the conclusion follows logically
that the United Nations has to do its own part in this
respect. Women must be given leadership positions, in
particular as special representatives and envoys of the
Secretary-General. This is the best way not only to
illustrate the commitment of the Organization itself,
but also to bring about catalytic effect: to create
awareness among the people concerned in a manner
leading to the stronger involvement of women at all
levels. The promise made in resolution 1325 (2000) has
not yet been fulfilled. My delegation has been active on
this particular issue for several years now, and again,
we are very grateful for the contribution you yourself
have made, Mr. President, in this respect.

Involving women as participants must go hand in
hand with addressing their special needs and
vulnerability. Clearly, women are more vulnerable to
the effects of armed conflict than men. Very often, an
already existing culture of violence and discrimination
against women is exacerbated in times of armed
conflict. Protection of women in such times must
therefore begin during times of peace. But in addition
to these systemic elements, it is also the changed and
changing character of armed conflicts that puts women
at special risk. The systematic and deliberate targeting
of civilian populations has become a recurrent pattern
in recent armed conflicts, and women are
disproportionately affected by forced displacement,
landmines, sexual violence and - as a particular
consequence thereof - HIV/AIDS.

The full observance of international law, in
particular refugee and international humanitarian law is
therefore crucial. As far as the progressive
development of international law is concerned, strides
have been made over the past few years, in particular
in the area of sexual violence, through the work of the
ad hoc tribunals established by the Security Council
and, of course, in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, which has just entered into force. On
the other hand, we have also witnessed attempts to
undermine international legal standards and are
therefore challenged to uphold and defend the existing
gains made. Its full implementation would indeed go a
long way to providing the necessary protection to
women.

This debate is one more step in a long process.
Resolution 1325 (2000) gives us a very solid basis to
work with, and we look forward to the specific
recommendations of the Secretary-General and the
Special Adviser. We hope that they will be concrete
and action-oriented and offer us valuable guidance,
especially in the area of institutional capacity-building,
which can be the starting point for mainstreaming a
gender perspective in all aspects of peace operations.

