Ms. Heyzer: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Security
Council for having given me the honour of addressing
the Council on the important issue of women's
participation in peace processes, on the fifth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
participation of women in all aspects of peace
processes and attention to the needs and priorities of
women are not simply gender-equality goals. They are
crucial to just and sustainable peace. Women know the
cost of war, what it means to be displaced, to be
excluded from public life and to be regarded as less
than full citizens. They know the realities on the
ground and what needs to be done to address the
injustices of war and prevent a relapse into conflict.
They can be, and must be, part of the lasting peace.

The United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) has worked in over 20 conflict-
affected countries to help bring women to the peace
table and strengthen their role in peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction. Our work has focused on
supporting women's rights and inclusion in
constitutional, legal-reform and institution-building
processes, as well as on strengthening women's
leadership and participation in decision-making. We
have seen that women can foster ties among opposing
factions across political and ethnic lines so as to
generate genuine dialogue. They can bring a different
perspective to peace negotiations, raising critical
issues - from land rights to rape babies - that might
otherwise be overlooked. And they can build a
foundation to sustain peace. Our work has generated
some very important lessons that I would like to share
today.

The first lesson relates to the issue of creating a
more inclusive society. Peace processes, if they are to
be effective, need to take into account women's
experiences and capabilities. Failure to do so leads to a
justice deficit for women and girls and to a framework
for peace and security that fails to address their human
rights and socio-economic conditions. The range of
issues covered in peace agreements and the process of
implementation are then limited to men's experiences
of conflict, men's expectations for peacebuilding and
men trying to forgive men for crimes against women.

The fact that peace agreements are silent on
critical issues affecting the lives of women and girls
means that the human rights of half of the population
are ignored, undermining the foundations of societies
emerging from conflict that are aspiring to establish
democracy and the rule of law.
In resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
spoke with one voice in emphasizing the need to
mainstream gender justice and gender equality in all
peace processes. Resolution 1325 (2000) has been the
bedrock of support for the efforts of women to
participate in peace processes and the building of
institutions and to insist that the injustices they have
suffered in conflict be addressed. The overriding goal
for women is social transformation, not their
reintegration into a system in which they are
marginalized. They seek full citizenship, social justice
and empowerment based on respect for international
standards of human rights. If they are to make real
progress, they need our commitment and support, as
required by resolution 1325 (2000).

The second lesson relates to developing a
common women's agenda. Our experience in

supporting women in peace processes - from the
Mano River countries to the Great Lakes, the Sudan,
Somalia, Afghanistan and Timor-Leste - has shown

the importance of developing and implementing a
common women's agenda for promoting peace and
security that transcends political and ethnic lines and
advances gender equality. But this entails a long-term
commitment of support and requires an investment of
time, effort and resources to enable women from
different sides of a conflict to come together to identify
common priorities and goals.

In such countries as Afghanistan and Colombia,
UNIFEM. and its partners have supported national
forms of consultation on women to build these
common agendas, and these have been used by our
national machineries as a basis for constituency-
building for their work in the early stages of
rebuilding.

In the Sudan, building on a long-term partnership
with Sudanese women, UNIFEM, together with the
Government of Norway, convened in April a meeting
of women from the north and the south to develop a
common agenda to be presented to the Oslo
Conference. In Kosovo, where we assisted women in
developing a common national action plan, women are
now asking UNIFEM. to assist them so that they can be
at the table where future status issues are being
discussed.

The process of uniting around common priorities
for peace is a vital first step, but we have learned that
such international support must be provided in a way
that allows women to take full ownership of the
priorities established. Our role is to be a trusted partner
and honest broker.

An example of that role was seen in July this
year, when UNIFEM. was asked by Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to organize a dialogue among
women so as to identify their common priorities for
peace. That resulted in the formation of an
International Women's Commission to support a just
and sustainable peace, which was recently endorsed by
a presidential decree by the Palestinian National
Authority. The Parliament of Israel has also endorsed
resolution 1325 (2000) and the participation of women
in the peace process.

The third lesson is creating an environment to
facilitate women's effective participation. While
women are advocates for their participation in peace
processes, quotas can do much to ensure their greater
participation. At the same time, women's effectiveness
can be enhanced by the facilitators of these processes,
who can play a critical role in bringing local women
leaders and women's groups engaged in informal peace
processes into the formal peace processes. But we need
to ensure that women remain involved throughout the
phases of implementation.

Another important element is the composition of
the facilitation team, which should have equal
representation by men and women and a solid
understanding of gender issues. The role and
leadership of a Special Representative of the Secretary-
General is also critical, as we have seen in the situation
in the Great Lakes region.

In addition, women in conflict-affected countries
have also called on many of our partners to support
them in capacity-building and the technical skills
needed to participate effectively in peace processes. In
Afghanistan, for example, UNIFEM. has supported
networks of women lawyers and judges involved in
drafting the constitution and has supported women's
participation as voters and as candidates.

Fourthly, in terms of achieving justice for
women, peace agreements often fall short of providing
any strategy or resources to ensure implementation or
measures to sanction non-action, especially with regard
to issues affecting women. It is clear from our work on
gender justice that justice and peace are closely
interlinked. Gender justice can no longer be bargained
away as a "soft chip" for realizing other political and
operational gains. It must be central to any rule of law
organization.

But many of the needs of women can be realized
very easily if the international community is serious
about supporting and resourcing them, focusing on
addressing the most pressing needs of women who are
victims of war, who are trafficked or infected with
HIV/AIDS, who are widowed, refugees or internally
displaced.

But at the heart of the implementation of any real
justice in countries recovering from conflict is the
demand that human rights violations against women
and girls be treated and regarded as crimes by the
criminal justice system. Gender justice must not be left
to the realm of customary and traditional legal systems.

In terms of moving forward, we would all agree
that today resolution 1325 (2000) has a growing
constituency in countries around the world. However,
if that constituency is to move beyond women's rights
advocates to make a real difference in the lives of
women and girls, it must be embraced by men and
boys, emerging countries and Governments,
multilateral and regional organizations, and donors. In
moving forward, I would like to suggest some ways to
ensure that existing United Nations mechanisms, as
well as the Peacebuilding Commission, work on behalf
of women as well as men to meet the calls made by
resolution 1325 (2000).

First, the United Nations needs to adopt a more
holistic one-system approach to systematically address
the needs and capabilities of women throughout all
phases from conflict to peace. This has to be done in a
seamless flow. It must ensure that UNIFEM. has a seat
at every table.

Women and the civil society of a conflict-affected
country, including in the rural areas, must be involved
at every stage in the assessment and planning of such
work.

Finally, there must be increased outreach to men
and boys of a country so that they truly understand that
promoting gender equality and gender justice benefits
women and men alike. But the focus must be not only
on the men and boys of the conflict-affected country. It
must also be on United Nations peacekeepers and staff
putting an immediate stop to the sexual exploitation of
the very women they are supposed to protect. Only
then will peace, including peace in the home and in the
field, be possible for women after war, and only then
will women be able to contribute as full citizens to
build a better society for all.

