Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to express my delegation's gratitude to you, Sir, for
having convened this open debate on women and peace
and security, and for following up on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

It is of the utmost importance to share
experiences and points of view vis-a-vis the design of a
coherent and effective strategy for implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). In its capacity as a member of
the "friends of 1325", Colombia attaches special
importance to that process, in which it has participated
since its earliest stages. Our participation is guided by
the conviction that the effective promotion of gender
equality and the empowerment of women in the areas
of peace and security is critical. The United Nations
system can effectively contribute to the fulfilment of
the responsibilities incumbent on States in those areas
through specific cooperation initiatives.

In that regard, we note with satisfaction the
Secretary-General's acknowledgement in his report of
12 September, 2007, of the significant progress that has
been achieved in the implementation of the
aforementioned resolution. The report states that

"One of the major lessons learned from the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in
2005-2007 is that without concerted efforts with
Governments and civil society at the country
level, the implementation of the resolution would
remain elusive" (A/2007/56 7, para. 36).

That is particularly true for Colombia, where
interaction between civil society and the United
Nations system has been an ongoing factor in the
drafting and implementation of comprehensive
approaches to programmes for the advancement of
women and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Through democratic security policies,
economic recovery, social equity and human
development, Colombia has made notable progress in
that field.
In Colombia, the Office of the Presidential
Adviser for Women's Equity and the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs established a series of round tables on
women, peace and security, which have conducted
assessments and promoted awareness of resolution
1325 (2000) and of the country report on its
implementation. A group of women from different
regions have also received training in conflict
prevention and conflict resolution. The constant
support of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) and the help of many non-
governmental organizations have enabled the
Government to conduct an important number of
activities, initiatives and projects designed to promote
and implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to
mainstream gender issues in national policies.

That is reflected in the National Development
Plan 2006-2010, and I would like to highlight some of
the Plan's activities with respect to affirmative action,
a cross-cutting approach to gender and social
reactivation.

Colombia is implementing an affirmative action
policy entitled "Women - Builders of peace and
development". The policy prioritizes goals related to
employment and enterprise development, education
and culture, political participation and the prevention
of violence against women. It includes more than 100
protection measures, to be applied by various
authorities, to counter domestic violence, marriage
breakdown and labour discrimination.

The cross-cutting approach to gender involves all
State agencies. Its results are reflected in laws,
jurisprudence and public policies with a gender
perspective, in strengthening institutional mechanisms
working on women's issues, and in consolidating
disaggregated information systems, among other
things. I would like to highlight four structural
strategies within the social reactivation policy that
promote greater gender equality: human capital
development and employment, consolidation of the
social security system, a network for comprehensive
attention to the population living in extreme poverty
and the promotion of microcredit.

I would also like to highlight the helpful role that
the Organization of American States has played at the
regional level, through the Inter-American Commission
of Women. Following up on the mandates of the Inter-
American Program on the Promotion of Women's

Human Rights and Gender Equity and Equality and the
Inter-American Democratic Charter, the Commission
conducted the Training Course on Gender, Conflict and
Peace-Building for the Andean and Central American
regions. The recommendations of that project are
particularly relevant for our debate today, since they
underline how it is possible to build an agenda from
the regional perspective that contributes to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

In the report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security, it is stated that Governments
have the primary responsibility for implementing the
resolution. With that understanding, Colombia
appreciates the role that the Security Council has
played in guiding and revitalizing, through resolution
1325 (2000) and its plan of action, the process of
consultation with concerned entities of the United
Nations system and civil society organizations to
cooperate with Governments to meet their
commitments within the framework of that resolution.

On the other hand, we understand that in pursuing
these issues, the Security Council contributes
substantially to the preservation of peace and security,
which supports its central mandate as contained in the
United Nations Charter. Colombia welcomes the
recommendation contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
that the United Nations system accelerate the
development of a comprehensive knowledge and
information system, accessible to Member States, in
order to share good practices and lessons learned in the
implementation of the resolution. That type of
initiative should be added in a positive manner to the
national and regional initiatives aimed at strengthening
national capacity-building for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

We also believe that broad and inclusive
intergovernmental consultations concerning analysis of
the gender architecture and the advancement of
women, and consensus among States, are essential
preconditions for ensuring that the models and
practices adopted are properly legitimate and effective.

In that regard, and particularly concerning the
possibility that accountability mechanisms may be
established in the context of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), we underscore the contribution
of the General Assembly to strengthening the
cooperation with States in those complex tasks.
At the same time, we note with reservations the
suggestions that have been made concerning the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that Member
States strengthen monitoring and accountability for the
national implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in
particular through the establishment of a Security
Council mechanism to monitor national
implementation. My country considers that this
recommendation is not appropriate, because it would
eventually result in the creation of a mechanism
whereby the Security Council would single out
countries on the basis of thematic issues that should,
according to the United Nations Charter, be discussed
and dealt with in the General Assembly. We agree to
the additional work that should be done towards the
protection of the rights of women, as long as they
remain under the purview of the existing United
Nations forums in the area of human rights.

The approach that results from a mechanism such
as the one that has been suggested does not seem to be
the most appropriate for achieving sustainable
solutions. We would always rather have cooperation,
constructive dialogue and real support to countries
when they are dealing with issues that concern human
rights.

Seven years after the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), Colombia has
achieved important progress in strengthening the role
and capacity of women and in the fulfilment of their
rights. For our country, it is a matter of great
importance to continue to have the support of the
United Nations Systems on these issues, in the context
of elaborating a positive agenda. It is in that spirit that
my delegation will continue to actively participate in
the consideration of this important issue.

