Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain wishes
to express its gratitude for the opportunity to participate
in today's Security Council debate and to discuss the
specific measures that need to be promoted in order
to ensure the full participation of women and girls in
peace processes.

Currently, we have at our disposal a large body
of relevant resolutions and reports. Moreover, and as
Spain has already stated during previous debates,
experience has shown that when women have the means
and the legal framework to do so, they are extremely
effective in building peace. That is why this debate is so
important, because the role of women in peacebuilding
is indispensable.

Spain welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/732) and supports its observations and
recommendations, in particular the attention that the
role of women's organizations deserves in the context
of the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding. In that regard, Spain wishes to highlight
the need for the Security Council to not only hold
thematic debates and continue to strengthen normative
standards on the issue of women, peace and security,
but also to decisively promote the mainstreaming of
this key issue in all of its activities and decisions.

I would also like to make special mention of the
recent report of the Special Rapporteur on violence
against women, its causes and consequences, which
highlights the invisibility of women with disabilities in
times of conflict. They are the forgotten ones in wars,
refugee camps, reconciliation processes and in terms
of access to justice. It is therefore important that the
Security Council keep them in mind and appeals to
States to adopt the necessary measures to ensure the
safety and protection of persons with disabilities in
situations of armed conflict, humanitarian emergencies,
natural disasters and other hazardous situations.

My country also wishes to acknowledge the work
done in this area by UN-Women and its Executive
Director, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and to convey our
appreciation and gratitude for the recent publication
of the sourcebook on women, peace and security,
which is a very practical contribution to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
would like to encourage UN-Women to continue its
fruitful cooperation with other departments, agencies
and programmes of the United Nations system in order
to perform its role fully in addressing this issue. It will
have the full political support of Spain in that respect.

Spain has devoted significant efforts to the
promotion of the role of women and the gender
perspective in conflict situations. In that regard, I
would like to recall that my country drafted an action
plan on women, peace and security in 2007, which has
been updated several times since; in fact, the third
monitoring report was presented during the second half
of 2012.

Spain has also been promoting a number of
initiatives in the field of foreign policy, cooperation for
development and defence policy to ensure the proper
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Those efforts
entail two main lines of action, namely, promoting the
role of women in peacebuilding in conflict and post-
conflict situations, on the one hand; and, on the other
hand, curbing violence against women in conflict
situations in order to contribute to the elimination of
sexual violence, and especially of such outrageous
abuses as the systematic use of rape as a weapon ofwar.
At the same time, in response to the appeals of
the international community for greater efforts to
train civilian and military personnel on gender issues,
this year once again the Ministries of Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation and the Ministry of Defence of my
country, in collaboration with their counterparts in the
Netherlands, held the third iteration of the International
Course on Gender-Integrated Approach in Operations.
The course was held from 10 to 15 June in Madrid,
with the aim of providing the know-how and skills
needed to effectively implement gender mainstreaming
in international missions and operations. The course
focused on how to include the gender perspective in
the civilian and military aspects of peace operations
in various conflicts. Throughout the course, speakers
from the academic, civilian and military world took
part, coming from the United Nations, NATO and the
European Union. The fourth course will be held in the
Netherlands from 19 to 23 November.

Moreover, we continue to work in close collaboration
with civil society on future activities focused on
training inspired in large part by the recommendations
of the latest report of the Secretary-General.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), many
variables have changed in our approach to peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that changing
context, questions of gender have become an ever more
important factor when it comes to the planning, training
and evaluation of missions. However, the reasons that
led to the adoption ofresolution 1325 (2000) still persist.
Among them, the following are worth mentioning: the
neglect of the gender perspective in conflict prevention
and early warning; the lack of protection of women
and girls against the various forms of gender-based
violence, in particular rape and other forms of sexual
abuse; the particular vulnerability of certain groups,
such as indigenous women or women with disabilities,
in the context of conflict; the exclusion of women from
peace processes and post-conflict institutions; and the
limited role of women's organizations in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding. The
international community must therefore step up its
efforts in the interest of peace and security to take
advantage of the immense potential of women as agents
of change.

In conclusion, Spain would like to associate itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

