Ms. Gendi (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our appreciation to the
sisterly country of Uganda for organizing this
important debate on peacebuilding in post-conflict
situations. I would also like to welcome the report
(S/2010/386) of the Secretary-General on United
Nations efforts in peacebuilding, including its
important recommendations and proposals.

The United Nations has in recent years developed
and improved its peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict
situations through an integrated system established by
the General Assembly for that purpose. In the
meantime, the international community has come to
realize the significance of the decision made at the
2005 World Summit to establish the Peacebuilding
Commission, which, through its achievements over the
five years of its operations, has contributed
significantly to peacebuilding, along with the efforts of
the Secretary-General to solicit international support.

In that connection, Egypt has supported United
Nations peacebuilding efforts through the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
The activities of the Commission are becoming
increasingly important as a result of the expertise it has
acquired and the lessons it has learned over the years.
It also has a vital role to play in coordinating
international efforts to prevent post-conflict countries
from relapsing into conflict.

Peacebuilding has become a multidimensional
process, with varied priorities that complement each
other in order to reinforce stability, peace, security and
overall sustainable development. That requires
achieving balanced, simultaneous progress on all tracks
and priorities on a case-by-case basis. The maintenance
of international peace and security requires dual
emphasis on the military and social dimensions of
security sector reform and on ensuring the success of
disarmament and demobilization programmes for
former combatants through the establishment of a
development framework to deliver the basic security,
social and economic requirements essential to the
successful reintegration of ex-combatants into their
communities. It also requires the presence of many
factors for ensuring the sustainability of peace,
including a comprehensive national dialogue, social
justice, the impartiality and independence of the
judiciary and the rule of law, along with the launching
of a comprehensive process for economic and social
development.

Recently, certain voices have increasingly
advocated the need to start the processes of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding simultaneously. Egypt
believes that such views merit detailed and very careful
consideration. We recognize the importance of
strengthening, within a nationally owned framework,
the national capacities of Governments in post-conflict
countries, thereby laying the foundations for the launch
of a peacebuilding process that empowers a national
Government with the necessary prerequisites to assume
its responsibilities in the security and defence sectors
and launch an overall development process.

Similarly, due consideration must be given to the
overlap between the peacebuilding process and the
launch of a sustainable development framework in
post-conflict countries. Merely talking about efforts to
establish the foundations of good governance, the rule
of law and the application of the principles of
democracy and justice will not enable them to be
realized in communities plagued with poverty, disease,
hunger and an absence of decent standards of living, as
targeted in internationally agreed development goals.

It is thus of the utmost importance to launch a
peacebuilding process at the right time, to ensure the
successful establishment, during the early stages of
conflict resolution - which may coincide with
peacekeeping operations - of the central political,
economic and social pillars needed for comprehensive
development strategies supported by timely,
predictable and sustainable financial resources. It is
also essential to fully cooperate with national
stakeholders in creating an appropriate environment
and incentives that will help start a comprehensive
peacebuilding process within the country in question,
and in this way creating the conditions necessary for a
peacekeeping operation to draw down.

In this context, we look forward to the
completion of the international civilian capacity
review, which should take into account the need to
provide the necessary funding for the recruitment of
international civilian officials without jeopardizing
existing financial resources earmarked for
peacebuilding operations. It should also take account
of the specific needs and characteristics of the States
and communities where such personnel will be
deployed to back up efforts to build institutional and
human resources capacity. The review should also take
into account the need to further develop cooperation
frameworks between United Nations entities, regional
and subregional organizations and institutions in
countries of the South that have accumulated needed
peacebuilding expertise, either within the country
concerned or within a specific region, in order to
promote South-South and triangular cooperation in this
area.

Furthermore, the success of any peacebuilding
process also rests on its ability to ensure gender
equality and the empowerment of women in the socio-
economic and political spheres. It is important for the
General Assembly and the Security Council to study
and evaluate the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/466) on women's participation in
peacebuilding, and the seven commitments underlying
the proposed action plan. We should work to provide
expertise to the countries of the South, with a view to
maximizing the use of relevant human and institutional
capacities to ensure that the action plan is implemented
and fully promoted by the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women), recently established by the General
Assembly.

In this respect, the capacity of the Peacebuilding
Commission must be strengthened so that it can carry
out its mission ably and effectively. We are confident
that this can be achieved through consideration by the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council of the means for
implementing the recommendations and proposals
contained in the report of the co-facilitators of the
Commission review process, in coordination with top
contributors of troops and financial resources.

Successful peacebuilding requires the speedy
establishment of a monitoring and follow-up
mechanism to ensure that national and international
players meet their financial commitments, which is
needed to realize peacebuilding priorities and to ensure
consistent priorities among international funding
mechanisms - first and foremost, ensuring that the
work of the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is aligned with
the national peacebuilding priorities of the countries
involved. We also need innovative frnancial methods to
strengthen the resources of these mechanisms, in
particular the Peacebuilding Fund. In this regard, Egypt
suggested during the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly the holding of an annual donors
conference for the Peacebuilding Fund, similar to the
annual donors conference for the Central Emergency
Response Fund. This is aimed at ensuring increased
funding for future peacebuilding activities. We hope
that this proposal will enjoy the full support of the
general membership.

