Mr. Salam (Lebanon): First, I wish to thank you,
Madame, for organizing today's open debate. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Special Representative Wallstrom, Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy and Lieutenant General Gaye for their
comprehensive briefings.
Wartime sexual violence has been the subject of
one of history's greatest silences for long enough.
While the Security Council has adopted landmark
resolutions to try to combat what has been termed a
weapon of war, United Nations actors on the ground
still lack the necessary tools to fight this war crime.

Resolution 1960 (2010), adopted by the Council
today, provides them with some of these needed tools.
The Council has requested the Secretary-General to
list, in an annex to his annual report, parties that are
credibly suspected of committing or being responsible
for patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict on the Security
Council's agenda. Hence, the Council is not only
signalling to rapists in conflict zones around the world
that their acts will no longer go unchecked, but also
opening the way for more direct and constructive
United Nations engagement with those parties, upon
whom we call to make specific and time-bound
commitments to combating sexual violence.

Sexual violence is not inevitable. It is not cultural
and should not be considered as collateral damage.
When used systematically as a weapon of war, its
purpose is to break the will of people by dominating
them in humiliating and dehumanizing ways. It has
dire consequences not only on the populations against
whom it is perpetrated, but also on international peace
and security, as it poses enduring challenges to durable
stability and social cohesion. It is therefore our
collective responsibility to put an end to it.

It is my Government's hope that today's
resolution will establish formal monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence, and generate insightful analysis of trends and
patterns to better protect affected populations and
inform targeted measures. It is also important to further
reinforce trust between local communities and United
Nations peacekeeping missions on the ground and to
establish effective channels of communication that
would provide timely and accurate information in the
event of rapes.

Female peacekeepers and women protection
advisors are crucial in this sense. Where they have
been present, local populations have more readily
reported on instances of sexual violence. Today's
resolution unequivocally supports their presence and
the need to mainstream them. Furthermore, we
welcome the development by the Secretariat of
scenario-based training materials on combating sexual
violence for peacekeepers, and we encourage Member
States to use them.

Although the tools we have formalized today
through resolution 1960 (2010) will undoubtedly make
a difference in our efforts to end conflicts through a
fair and lasting peace, the accompanying establishment
of functional governmental institutions and the rule of
law remain the international community's best bet for
providing populations with the protection they deserve,
for ending impunity and for enabling victims and
communities to begin their painstaking recovery.

My country welcomes the adoption of resolution
1960 (2010) today and the clear signal it sends from
the international community to perpetrators of the
savage crimes of sexual violence around the world that
we will not stand idly by as the bodies of women are
turned into battlegrounds and that those perpetrators
will be held accountable for their acts.

