The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council this year, I would like to extend
my warm wishes for a very fruitful new year to all
members of the Security Council, the Secretariat and
the United Nations as a whole.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome
to the new members Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg,
the Republic of Korea and Rwanda. We look forward
to their participation in the work of the Council. Their
experience and wisdom will be of invaluable assistance
in the discharge of the Council's responsibilities.

I take this opportunity to express the Council's
gratitude to the outgoing members - Columbia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa - for their
important contributions to the work of the Council
during their terms in 2011 and 2012.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: I take this opportunity to pay
tribute on behalf of the Council to His Excellency
Mr. Mohammed Loulichki, Permanent Representative
of Morocco, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of December 2012. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council when I express
my deep appreciation to Ambassador Loulichki and
his team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Central African Republic

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic
and on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that
country (S/2012/956)


The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Central African Republic to participate in this
meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Margaret Vogt, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
the Central African Republic, and Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, to participate
in this meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I wish to welcome
Ms. Vogt, who is participating in today's meeting via
video teleconference from Libreville.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/956, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country.

I now give the floor to Ms. Vogt.


