Mr. Plasai (Thailand): It is my pleasure to speak
on behalf of the 10 member States of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), which is made up
of Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and my own country,
Thailand.

ASEAN wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2016/822), as well as
the Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and
the representative of civil society for their informative
briefings. We also wish to thank the Russian Federation
for convening this timely debate, which comes one
year after the conclusion of the high-level review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in
which Member States reiterated their commitment to
effectively implementing that milestone resolution.

It is encouraging to witness the growing awareness
around the world of the indispensable role of women
and their perspectives in the areas of peace and
security. Nevertheless, as rightly pointed out in the
Secretary-General's report, the subject of women and
peace and security is not being sufficiently utilized to
prevent conflict, and much remains to be done at all
levels. In that regard, ASEAN would like to update
Security Council members on the progress made in our
region as a result of resolution 1325 (2000), confirming
its validity.

As ASEAN implements the early stages of its
post-2015 Community, it continues to underscore
the increasing role and participation of women in all
three ASEAN pillars: the ASEAN Political-Security
Community, the ASEAN Economic Community and the
ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community. Women-related
issues and the gender perspective are addressed through
several key ASEAN mechanisms and frameworks.
Among others, allow me to mention the ASEAN
Committee on Women and the ASEAN Commission
on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of
Women and Children. The ASEAN Declaration on
the Advancement of Women was adopted to promote
the equitable and effective participation of women,
wherever possible, in all fields, as well as to integrate
the specific concerns ofwomen and their roles as active
agents in peace, security and development into member
States' national plans. The adoption of the ASEAN
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against
Women and the ASEAN Regional Plan of Action on
the Elimination of Violence against Children provides
another concrete example that reaffirms ASEAN's
commitment to tackle violence against women in
all forms. During the ASEAN Summit in Vientiane
in September, ASEAN leaders tasked the ASEAN
Commission on the Promotion and Protection of the
Rights of Women and Children to continue its efforts
in implementing the ASEAN Regional Plan of Action
on that issue.

At the second ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on
Women, held in Manila on 23 October 2015, all ASEAN
sectoral bodies and member States were encouraged to
promote gender responsiveness and integrate gender
mainstreaming into their respective activities and
initiatives. The Meeting also adopted the 2016-2020
Work Plan of the ASEAN Committee on Women,
which focuses on six key priority areas: the promotion
of women in leadership, non-gender stereotyping and
social norm change, gender mainstreaming across
the three pillars, the elimination of violence against
women, the economic empowerment of women and the
protection and empowerment of women in vulnerable
situations. Those priorities are comprehensive and very
much in line with the key aspects of resolution 1325
(2000).

ASEAN recognizes the constructive role and
valuable contributions of female peacekeepers, and we
therefore support the call for an increase in their number.
Several ASEAN members have already provided,
and will continue to provide, well-trained female
peacekeepers in response to that call. We strongly
hope that ASEAN's holistic approach to addressing
women-related issues will be complementary to global
endeavours to implement resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security.

Please allow me to say a few words in my national
capacity. Like other Member States, the Kingdom of
Thailand attaches great importance to the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which
requires collective international efforts. We therefore
welcome the establishment of the women, peace and
security national focal points network, proposed
by Spain and the United Kingdom, as an important
step towards that goal, and we have gladly joined
the initiative.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the need
for all of us to ensure the universal implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Thailand, together with other
ASEAN members, stands ready to work closely with
the international community in that respect.

