Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour to speak also on behalf of the European
Union and those countries which have aligned
themselves with this statement.

On behalf of the European Union, I would like to
extend my particular thanks to the visiting speakers for
their powerful presentations this morning and to you,
Mr. President, for having brought us together. Events
such as this help to underline the importance of this
landmark resolution. It is now five years since
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, and it is having an
impact at the regional, national and international
levels. But that is not in any sense an argument for
complacency. More can and must be done.

The resolution draws attention to the central role
that women play in conflict resolution. We have heard
firsthand from a number of speakers today about how
important it is to include women at all stages of the
peace process. That inclusion helps to ensure wider
support for the peace process itself, it increases
legitimacy, and it contributes to building a
comprehensive and sustainable peace.

Article 8 of the United Nations Charter and the
Convention of the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) both commit
us to ensuring the equal participation of women in
international relations. That commitment is crucial to
the successful implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). But we must also apply that commitment to all
levels of decision-making - international, regional
and national. One can look around the Council table
and draw some conclusions from that statement.

One month ago, our leaders reiterated that
"progress for women is progress for all" (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 58) and reaffirmed
their commitment to the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). They also,
as colleagues have already remarked, committed
themselves to establishing a Peacebuilding
Commission, which now provides us with a unique
opportunity to create a United Nations system that is
capable of building and sustaining peace. We must
bring these commitments together if we are to develop
a coherent and holistic approach to peacebuilding and
at the same time guarantee a smooth and enduring
transition to peace with the full involvement of all
actors. Women must be able to participate in, and
benefit from, all peacebuilding activities.

A strong commitment to conflict prevention and
peacebuilding can be met only, in our view, by a strong
commitment to ensuring that all members of society
are able to take an active role in building peace. It is
therefore only by ensuring the full inclusion of women
in the political process that we can guarantee just and
peaceful societies.

The European Union believes that the
Peacebuilding Commission should, as part of its
mandate, ensure that women and women's groups are
represented in peace processes.

The Commission should ensure that work to
promote a more coherent and more integrated approach
to peacebuilding takes place and that it benefits from
the advantages of the experience and knowledge that
women can bring to the negotiating table, as we have
heard this morning. By bringing together peacekeeping
operations and development partners, the Commission
can ensure that progress is made to integrate gender
into the political process of a post-conflict country and
that it is not lost once the immediate post-conflict
phase ends.

One important way for the United Nations to
support women's rights in post-conflict situations is by
supporting legal systems that recognize and protect
those rights. That is a significant role for the proposed
new Rule of Law Assistance Unit. We hope the Unit
not only helps the United Nations devote attention and
resources to the establishment of the rule of law but
also ensures women's access to and participation in
justice.

For its part, the European Union is considering a
number of measures to implement resolution 1325
(2000) within our European Security and Defence
Policy. Those measures recognize the important role
that women play in promoting peace and security. The
measures contribute to the EU's general approach to
gender mainstreaming and are a step towards a more
systematic integration of a gender perspective in the
Union's external relations.

The measures include recognizing the need for
improved gender balance in operations under the
European Security and Defence Policy, promoting the
role of women in peacebuilding, increasing dialogue
with local and international women's groups,
protecting women and girls affected by conflict and
training European Union personnel, particularly those
taking part in EU crisis management operations, on
gender and awareness-raising.

The European Union is also working within the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) to promote resolution 1325 (2000). A draft
decision on women in conflict prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict rehabilitation will be
considered by the OSCE Ministerial Council in
December. The OSCE will use the resolution to build
on and reinforce its 2004 decision to establish an
action plan to promote gender equality. That commits
the OSCE secretariat to developing further strategies to
increase the number of women in the OSCE secretariat,
its institutions and its field missions. Sir, there is
coherence here with what your presidency has been
saying about relations with regional organizations. It
all comes together sensibly.

We welcome the United Nations system-wide
action plan produced by the Secretary-General, which
will help ensure closer attention to gender perspectives
in conflict prevention and peacekeeping activities. As
we move towards implementation, coordination within
the United Nations will continue to be key. But the
United Nations cannot work alone. More needs to be
done at the national level. Member States need to take
responsibility for the success of resolution 1325 (2000)
and ensure that it is integrated into their national
policies and training programmes if there is to be real
progress.
The widespread mainstreaming of gender
considerations into all policies and programmes at the
international and national levels is also a crucial factor
in the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. The
European Union condemns all violations of the human
rights of women and girls in situations of armed
conflict and the use of sexual exploitation, violence
and abuse. The EU urges the complete cessation by all
parties of such acts with immediate effect. The EU
stresses the need to end impunity for such acts as part
of a comprehensive approach to seeking peace and to
create a safer and more sustainable environment for
women's participation.

Resolution 1325 (2000) urges Member States to
produce their own national implementation
strategies - we have heard quite a lot about that this
morning - ensuring the promotion of the resolution in
domestic policies through, for example, mainstreaming
gender across government systems and providing
appropriate gender training, including in military,
police and civilian components of Government.

A number of European Union countries are now
beginning to address the need to develop their own
national action plans or national-level strategies. Those
will encourage a system-wide approach that links
development, humanitarian and defence work. Such
strategies not only will ensure that Member States have
a coherent cross-government approach to resolution
1325 (2000) but should also provide a standard against
which government policies can be measured. They also
provide a useful means to identify and overcome
ongoing barriers to the full implementation of the
resolution.

Implementing resolution 1325 (2000) remains as
important today as it was five years ago - if not more
so. We must do justice to the resolution, ensure that
women are full and equal participants in peace
processes and, through that, create sustainable peace.

The other essential element of the resolution is
that we recognize the role of women in conflict and
what women have to suffer, and why, in the post-
conflict phase. We have to pay particular attention to
those problems, as well as build in the right of women
to participate in building peace.

As has been demonstrated so clearly today, civil
society, the United Nations and Member States must
continue to work together to ensure full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels.
The presidential statement proposed for adoption today
demonstrates our commitment to the principles of the
resolution. We must make sure that we fulfil that
commitment. We must place greater emphasis on
putting into practice the provisions of the resolution
and, as representatives of the United Nations, ensure
that we tackle the problems of abuse, especially sexual
misconduct by personnel actually out there in the field
in United Nations peacekeeping missions.

