Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

We welcome the focus of today's debate on the
needs faced by women and girls in armed conflict
and post-conflict settings. Women and girls face
discrimination and violations during all phases of
conflict The use of sexual and gender-based violence
as a tactic ofwar is just one of such violations. Conflict
often increases women's responsibilities as care-givers
and breadwinners for extended families, and does so
under difficult circumstances. A vast majority of the
displaced population is made up of women and girls.

Almost 15 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we can see an important level of political
commitment and activity in the field of women and
peace and security. However, at the same time, we have
been witnessing a series of troubling developments
linked to conflict leading to mass displacements,
humanitarian catastrophes and serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Women and girls are often the main victims. We should
therefore strengthen our resolve to implement, in a
systematic and sustainable way at national, regional and
global levels, the commitments that we have made. We
have the policies and mechanisms in place, but we need
to make more efficient and better use of them. We need
to make sure that civilians, including women and girls,
are protected during conflict, and that humanitarian aid
reaches those most in need. Given the changing nature
of conflicts, we need to develop innovative ways to
communicate principles of international humanitarian
law and to ensure humanitarian access. The rotection
and relief provided must correspond to the needs of the
whole civilian population.

We need to systematically tailor humanitarian
responses so that they address the specific needs faced
by women and girls during armed conflict. That can
include conducting gender-sensitive needs assessments
and collecting sex- and age-disaggregated data, as well
as making progress in linking relief, rehabilitation
and development. The EU continues to address the
specific needs of women and girls through gender-
and age-sensitive programming, using a three-track
approach that combines mainstreaming, targeted
actions and capacity-building. The European Union
has also introduced a gender-age marker, a tool to
assess how strongly EU-funded humanitarian actions
integrate gender and age considerations.

We note with concern the continued sexual violence,
rape, forced marriage, forced prostitution, trafficking
and sexual slavery that characterize an increasing
number of conflicts, as well as the continuing use of
sexual and gender-based violence as a tactic of war.
We welcome the clear global, regional and national
commitments taken to tackle this issue, including those
made at the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict, held in June 2014, the call to action
on protecting girls and women in emergencies, the
framework for cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union and the joint communiques
between Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General and an increasing number of Governments.

We must end impunity for crimes of sexual
violence, which must be properly investigated and
prosecuted. In that regard, we emphasize the significant
advancement in international law made by the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, as well as
by non-permanent international criminal tribunals, in
combating sexual violence in conflict. We commend
UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response for their roster
of experts specifically trained in investigating sexual
and gender-based crimes. We also welcome the increased
use of the human rights- and sexual violence-related
criteria in the Security Council sanctions regimes. We
welcome the Secretary-General's guidance note on
reparations for sexual violence, published in June 2014.

Attention to the protection of women and girls
and their participation in conflict resolution and post-
conflict peacebuilding must be transformed from an
exception to a standard practice, through systematic
inclusion in policy guidelines, codes of conduct and
training. It should also receive the attention of senior
management in missions and other conflict resolution
and peacebuilding mechanisms. Seventy per cent of
the EU's own missions deployed in 2013, including
all military operations, had at least one gender
adviser-trainer. The EU continues its work on specific
training modules on human rights and gender in crisis
management, ensuring a focus on sexual violence in
armed conflicts. Gender advisers must be deployed
in all United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. We also call for the further
deployment of UN-Women protection advisers.

To improve the situation of women and girls, we
need to make better use of the international legal and
policy instruments. The Convention on Elimination
of Discrimination against Women's general
recommendation No. 30, on tackling challenges to
gender equality in situations of conflict, is a landmark
achievement. The EU welcomes the development of
a guidebook to support more effective reporting by
States parties to the Committee. We also underline
the importance of reviewing our progress on women
and peace and security in the context of the twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action.

The resilience of women and girls in situations of

conflict and displacement must be acknowledged, and
their capacity to be active agents in conflict resolution
and in building lasting peace harnessed. The principles
of protection and participation go hand in hand. We
continue to implement an EU systematic plan on women
and peace and security: the comprehensive approach to
the implementation of these resolutions. The second
report on the implementation of the comprehensive
approach, from February 2014, also sets the EU priority
areas for the next reporting period of 2013-2015,
which include transitional justice, women's political
participation and economic empowerment, women's
involvement in peace processes and preventing sexual
violence in conflict. Seventeen European Union
member States have adopted national action plans with
the aim of strengthening their action on resolution 1325
(2000).

We look forward to the global Review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) this year.
We hope that it provides an additional push to make all
our commitments on women and peace and security a
reality. Preparations for the review will be conducted in
parallel with the peacebuilding review and the review of
peace operations. That provides us with an opportunity
that we must not miss in order to embed a strong gender
dimension in the United Nations peace and security
architecture. The upcoming review of peace operations
should aim at achieving a model of peacekeeping
that puts a strong focus on the protection of civilians.
Tackling sexual violence should be a priority. United
Nations peace operations should play a critical role in
the implementation of the responsibility to protect, as
they are often in the front line when a State is unable or
unwilling to protect civilians from the risk of atrocity
crimes. In this context, United Nations operations need
to be staffed and equipped in a way that allows staff
to better interact with the local population and civil
society organizations, with the overarching aim of
responding to warning signals and reducing the risk of
atrocity crimes.

This is a year of reviews at the United Nations,
including the reviews of resolution 1325 (2000),
peacebuilding and peace operations. We need
to work together to ensure that these parallel
processes - which are to shape the way we deal with
peace and security - are ambitious and strategic.
We have a great opportunity to advance the cause of
the protection of civilians and to redouble our efforts
to alleviate the suffering of women and girls who are
trapped in the dynamics of violent conflict.

