Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Iceland, as a member
of the European Economic Area, aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by my colleague from the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union, but in
addition I would like to make a few remarks.

My delegation welcomes this opportunity as a
non-Council member to address the Security Council
on the subject of women, peace and security, in an
open meeting, on the fourth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

At the outset, my Government would like to
express its gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
report on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), contained in document S/2004/814. That
resolution has proven to be an important milestone for
the direct involvement of women in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peace-building. It is now
finally acknowledged that women have an important
role to play in the establishment and maintenance of
peace and security in conflict regions.

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
requires the same strong efforts as that of any other
Security Council resolution. Since the adoption of the
resolution, United Nations Member States and other
entities have taken important steps to implement it. The
report points out that, nonetheless, major gaps and
challenges still remain in all areas, including in
particular in relation to women's participation in
conflict prevention and peace processes. The
international community must continue its work, with
full resolve and commitment on the part of all
stakeholders, and make it a top priority fully to
implement the resolution.

It is true that armed conflict has a severe impact
and widespread repercussions on people and societies
in general. Women and girls become especially
vulnerable as the infrastructure disintegrates during the
period of conflict and the security network within their
society breaks down. Under such circumstances, the
protection of women and girls against gender-based
violence is of the utmost importance.

It is regrettable, to say the least, that the
international community has thus far not been able to
prevent acts of violence against women from occurring
during armed conflict, and that we are still today
receiving stark and disturbing evidence of gender-
based violence in countries such as Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan. Our
only option is to aim to prevent gender-based violence
and to make the strongest possible efforts to pursue our
goals in that regard. Early-warning mechanisms have a
crucial role to play in responding to gender-based
violence and to prevent it from reoccurring. Such
monitoring efforts must be complemented by practical
measures to end impunity and to bring those who are
responsible to justice.

My Government concurs with the findings of the
report of the Secretary-General regarding the important
role that the international tribunals for Rwanda and
Yugoslavia have played in the jurisprudence on sexual
violence under international law. The Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court recognizes the
specific impact of armed conflict on women by
criminalizing gender-based violence. Even though the
international community has set up these mechanisms
to react to the horrific repercussions of armed conflict,
the responsibility of those States where armed conflict
occurs cannot be avoided; they bear primary
responsibility for bringing perpetrators to justice.

My Government is deeply disturbed by reports of
alleged sexual exploitation and sexual abuse committed
by United Nations personnel, and we agree with the
Secretary-General that such behaviour is absolutely
unacceptable. The United Nations and its Member
States must do their utmost to root out any signs of
such violence.

Finally, I would like to make mention of the
support the Icelandic Government has given to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Since 2000
the Icelandic Government has had a gender expert
working at the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) office in Kosovo, and this summer
it extended her term until February 2005. UNIFEM. in
Kosovo has been playing an important role in
advancing gender equality by assisting local women in
developing an action plan for gender equality in
Kosovo and by providing various courses for
municipalities and professionals to enhance gender
equality. Furthermore, the Icelandic Government
supported UNIFEM's National Committee in Iceland in
the organization of a conference on women, war and
security, with Elisabeth Rehn, former Minister for
Defence of Finland, as keynote speaker, and by
financing a report on gender mainstreaming in the
Iceland Crisis Response Unit - the Icelandic
Peacekeeping Unit.

