Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would first like to thank the French
presidency for organizing today's meeting. We are
grateful to the briefers for their statements and
helpful information.

In the time that has passed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) considerable success has been
achieved in enhancing the role of women in preventing
and resolving armed conflicts as well as in post-
conflict rebuilding. Unfortunately, the same cannot
be said about another, no less important, task, which
is ensuring the appropriate protection of women in the
course of conflicts. In spite of the many efforts that have
been made, women continue to fall victim to various
forms of violence, losing their lives or their health
during conflicts. We have been shocked by the barbaric
acts and atrocities that terrorist groups have committed
against women. As we consider the subject ofthe women
and peace and security agenda, we therefore believe it
is particularly important to focus specifically on issues
directly related to the establishment and maintenance
of international peace and security.

With regard to other associated topics - such
as ensuring gender equality, expanding rights and
opportunities for women and upholding women's human
rights - there are specialized organizations and
mechanisms in place for dealing with them. As we
see it, the way that the topic of women and peace and
security is discussed is increasingly straying from
its basic framework. We are seeing a similar trend in
the approaches used in preparing the thematic report
of the Secretary-General. We also want to note once
again that it is inappropriate to use the platform of the
Security Council to promote controversial concepts and
approaches that do not have broad international support.

We firmly believe that there is significant potential
for women's participation in various aspects ofresolving
armed conflicts and post-conflict reconstruction, and
that the direct participation of women in preventing
armed conflicts and in post-conflict reconstruction is
a major requisite for eliminating violence against them.
Women have a special role to play in United Nations
peacekeeping. As far as Russia's contribution in that
area is concerned, we have ensured a 15 per cent
female presence in our peacekeeping efforts. We also
train women police officers in United Nations certified
training centres, and we also plan to do the same for
women soldiers by the end of the year.

The Security Council's regular debates on women
and peace and security enable us to take stock of the
progress made in improving the protection of women
in conditions of armed conflict and ensuring their full
and effective participation in efforts to prevent and
resolve crises. We believe it is important to ensure that
our efforts to develop comprehensive approaches in this
area do not lead us to ignore the specifics of particular
conflict situations, or to the inclusion of gender aspects
in the work of the United Nations becoming an end in
itself. We should also take this kind of differentiated
approach to the mandates given to United Nations
departments and structures regarding the incorporation
ofgender issues into their activities. They have their own
clear remits, and for most of them issues related women
and peace and security are not a defining priority but
just one of a number of factors within the framework of
their activities related to preventing and settling armed
conflicts and dealing with post-conflict situations. Let
us also not forget that the primary responsibility for
protecting women at every stage of an armed conflict
rests with Governments and that measures undertaken
by United Nations entities and civil society should be
aimed at supporting and complementing the efforts
of States.

I want to say a few words in connection with the
statement made by the delegation of Ukraine. There was
no mention in that statement today of Ms. Savchenko.
Perhaps not everyone here recalls how for several years,
at every Security Council meeting on women's issues,
the Ukrainian delegation would sound the alarm about
the fate of Nadiya Savchenko, who was presented as
a national heroine. It may be that not everyone knows
that after her return to Ukraine, Ms. Savchenko soon
became an extremely vocal critic of the policies of the
Kyiv regime, after which the Ukrainian authorities'
attitude to her cooled markedly and she fell into
disgrace, partly because she urged for launching
negotiations in Donetsk and Luhansk with the aim of
restoring peace and tried to promote that. That clearly
exemplifies the Ukrainian authorities' approach to the
issue of women's participation in resolving conflicts.

That is a clear illustration of the point of the
Ukrainian delegation's anti-Russian statements. Today
we were told once again about how women have
suffered as a result of the conflict in south-eastern
Ukraine. That is unfortunately true. And the people
responsible for it are the Kyiv authorities, who in 2014
launched military action against their own people.
Besides that, the conflict has been accompanied by
terrible crimes committed by the Ukrainian armed
forces against women. Anyone interested can find the
relevant information in the reports of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for example. The residents of the Donbas region,
including the elderly, have suffered greatly from
Kyiv's unmerciful economic and financial blockade.
In contrast, Russia has been consistently providing
the region with humanitarian assistance. We have
instituted an open-door policy for Ukrainian refugees,
51 per cent of whom are women and girls. Anyone
who ends up on Russian territory after suffering in the
armed conflict in Ukraine is offered essential social
assistance and access to education and health care, and
women and children get special attention because of
their particular vulnerability.

In conclusion, we would like to say that our
country has a unique history with regard to equality
between men and women. Decisions on that topic were
taken as long ago as the early years of the twentieth
century. Today women's participation in preventing and
resolving conflicts and ensuring sustainable peace is
becoming ever more important. That item is also high
on the Security Council's agenda, and deservedly so.
We intend to continue contributing to discussions on
various United Nations platforms on ways to ensure
meaningful improvements in the protection of women
and their rights and ensuring their effective participation
in peace processes.

