Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself

with the statement made earlier today on behalf of the

European Union and that made on behalf of the Human
Security Network.

Conflict-related sexual violence is a particularly
heinous and barbaric crime. It is undoubtedly
underreported, yet even so the recent Secretary-
General's report (S/2014/181) presents an extensive
catalogue of crimes that are ongoing in 20 different
country situations in conflict and in post-conflict
settings. The victims - women and girls, men and
boys - are invariably among the most vulnerable in
their societies. Since last year's annual open debate (see S/PV.7044), we have seen further significant normative
progress. Resolution 2106 (2013), adopted last June,
addressed impunity and effective justice. Resolution
2122 (2013) of last October calls for more consistent
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, with special attention to enhancing women's
participation and leadership.

Last September's Declaration of Commitment
to End Sexual Violence in Conflict was endorsed by
145 countries, and the United Kingdom will continue
its leadership on the issue with a global summit to
be convened in June. The Secretary-General has
rightly concluded that at the global level there is
now unprecedented commitment and momentum for
decisively addressing the scourge of sexual violence
in combat. And yet the critical question remains as to
how we can translate that normative progress into more
widespread change on the ground.

The primary route to ending sexual violence in
conflict is for Governments to take national ownership
of this issue, national responsibility and national action.
The United Nations and the international community
make an important contribution, but transformative
change happens only when national political
leaders adopt this agenda as their own. The Special
Representative for Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab
Hawa Bangura, understands this better than anyone,
having added national ownership as a sixth priority
of her mission when she assumed her post. The Office
of the Special Representative engages in practical
conversations with the relevant parties, making clearer
and more consistent requests of national authorities and
in return offering ready support and capacity-building.
We hope that through this dialogue the reported cases
of modest gains can now be scaled up.

The United Nations generally seeks to be as
practical and operational as possible in its approach,
and we welcome that. For example, there is an
increasing focus on training national security-sector
actors in confronting sexual violence in conflict. There
is certainly room to improve the protection afforded
to women and girls from violence in humanitarian
emergencies. Irish Aid, the Irish Government's
development cooperation programme, seeks to ensure
that the protection of women and girls in emergencies is
one of the key criteria in its decisions on humanitarian
funding. Over the next three years, we will progressively
increase the funding we provide for protection in
emergency and recovery contexts.

Along with the international community, civil
society actors in the countries concerned play a crucial
role. The Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the
Great Lakes region, Mary Robinson, is reaching out to
women's groups and civil society in that region. She is
building a sustainable constituency that will continue
to seek change, insist on the importance of ensuring
political participation by women and continue to hold
Governments accountable for the commitments they
have made.

Ireland was happy to be associated yesterday with
an event on Burma/Myanmar organized by the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security to look
at issues around sexual violence in conflict. The Special
Representative and a representative of Burmese civil
society, Ms. K'nyaw Paw, participated in the event. A
crucial part of Myanmar's transition to democracy
will be addressing current and historical human rights
abuses, which include crimes of sexual violence. The
Secretary-General's report calls for a comprehensive
protection and service response for survivors of sexual
violence, which we wholeheartedly support.

We must all strive to be as innovative as we can
in motivating national leaders to adopt the agenda of
women and peace and security as their own. We must
be more ambitious in addressing the root causes of
sexual violence in conflict - women's second-class
status and the culture of impunity. And we must seek to
promote women's political and economic empowerment
as crucial to the long-term prevention of sexual
violence. Only national political ownership in the
countries concerned can lead to decisive action to end
this scourge. We 4 the United Nations family, donors
and Member States, and civil society - must do all we
can to encourage such ownership.

