Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for your presence here today and for convening this
important debate. I would also like to express my
sincere appreciation to His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, for their informative and insightful briefings.
My special thanks also go to Ms. Saran Keita Diakite
for her statement on behalf of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security.

The Security Council has achieved significant
progress in combating conflict-related sexual violence
over the past few years, including by adopting resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). While those
documents reaffirm our strong commitment to ending
sexual violence in conflict, this egregious crime
remains a daunting challenge for the international
community in many new and ongoing armed conflicts.

In that context, my delegation welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on sexual violence in conflict
(S/2013/ 149). It shows that sexual violence continues to
occur in conflict and post-conflict situations throughout
the world, and that in some cases such acts have become
systematic and widespread. The report also reveals
worrying emerging trends, such as the nexus between
sexual violence and the illicit extraction of natural
resources and the displacement of civilian populations.
What is more worrying is that sexual violence is almost
universally under-reported. Against that backdrop, my
delegation would like to stress following key points.

First, we would like to underline the significance
of the fight against impunity. We can never expect
to eradicate sexual Violence without ensuring that
those responsible are systematically brought to
justice. We strongly support the Secretary-General's
recommendation in his report that the Council employ
all the means at its disposal to address sexual violence
in conflict, including referrals to the International
Criminal Court and mandating international
commissions of inquiry.

Ensuring accountability at the national level is
equally important. However, it is regrettable that the
lack of adequate national capacity to investigate and
prosecute sexual violence remains one of the main
impediments to ensuring accountability for such
crimes. In that regard, my delegation would like to
commend the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict, established pursuant
to resolution 1888 (2009). We further encourage the
Team to focus its efforts on strengthening institutional
safeguards against impunity at the national level.

Secondly, we need to be more systematic in
incorporating the issue of conflict-related sexual
violence into the work of the Security Council. The
Council, for its part, should give due attention and
consideration to sexual violence in authorizing and
renewing the mandates of peacekeeping and special
political missions through the inclusion of specific
language on that issue. Furthermore, the deployment of
women's protection advisers to United Nations missions
should continue to be encouraged.

My delegation also believes that the adoption of
targeted measures by the relevant Sanctions Committees
against perpetrators of sexual violence crimes is another
crucial means at the Council's disposal. It serves as a
strong deterrent to conflict-related sexual Violence by
raising the stakes for perpetrators. We welcome the fact
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo Sanctions
Committee imposed measures on those responsible for
committing sexual violence last year. My delegation
would like to encourage other Sanctions Committees
to similarly focus on sexual Violence crimes. The list
of parties that are credibly suspected of committing or
being responsible for patterns of rape and other forms
of sexual violence in situations of armed conflicts,
contained in the Secretary-General's report, could be a
good basis for such action by the Council.

Thirdly, we need to pay more attention and care
to victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence. Priority should be given to providing them
with sustainable assistance, including medical,
psychological, legal and other multisectoral services.
Those services should be tailored to the specific needs
of survivors. To that end, it is imperative to strengthen
the capacities of the relevant national institutions and
allocate adequate resources to the relevant programmes.

In that regard, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to ensure that reparations awarded
through judicial or administrative mechanisms be
established and made available to victims of sexual
violence in conflict. It is particularly important that
post-conflict reconstruction processes strengthen
overall systems for reparation, including the provision
of adequate and timely resources.

As a member of the Group of Friends of resolution
1325 (2000), the Republic of Korea has been actively
engaged in international efforts to combat conflict-
related sexual violence. In that context, my delegation
welcomes the timely adoption of the declaration on
preventing sexual violence in conflict by the Foreign
Ministers of the Group of Eight (G-8) last Thursday
in London. As the ministers of the G-8 recognized in
the declaration, efforts to address sexual violence in
armed conflict should be consistent with resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women,
peace and security. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that
the declaration highlights the importance of wider
efforts to promote better implementation of the relevant
resolutions.

To that end, the Korean Government is also working
on a draft national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), with the involvement of all the
relevant ministries and in close consultation with civil
society. The plan is expected to include measures to
combat conflict-related sexual violence and to provide
assistance to the victims and survivors of sexual
violence in conflicts.

Before concluding, my delegation would like
to commend the tremendous efforts of Special
Representative Bangura and her exemplary dedication
to the fight against conflict-related sexual violence. We
extend our full support for her mandate. The Republic of
Korea will continue to be committed to implementing all
resolutions to eradicate conflict-related sexual violence
in cooperation with the international community.

