Ms. Mabunda Lioko (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): It is an honour for me to take
part in this debate on behalf of my country. I would like
to congratulate you, Madam President, for convening
this meeting under your presidency. While encouraging
Ms. Allamin, who spoke at the outset of the meeting,
I would also like to thank Special Representative
Bangura for her commitment to the cause of women
and her particular efforts on behalf of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

For 10 years before the return to peace in 2013,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo faced deadly
armed conflicts in the east, where rape was used as a
weapon of war against women. Despite that troubled
decade, my country has worked to make progress in the
fight against sexual violence, as can be seen from the
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/203) today. Indeed,
there were 10,882 cases of sexual Violence reported in
2014 as compared to 15,323 in 2013, or a reduction of
33 per cent within a year. The cases of rape attributable
to the armed forces were reduced from 71 per cent in
2013 to 42 per cent in 2014, or a reduction of almost
50 per cent. That was no accident; it is a reflection of
our nation's commitment.

Since my appointment in July 2014, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has remained
on the alert, notably through an acceleration in the
work of the justice system and the fight against
impunity, with 135 rape indictments against members
of the military, in particular and for the first time, an
indictment against a general of the Congolese Army;
the appointment of three female generals, one of whom
is the head of the army training school; the adoption of
a plan reviewed by the United Nations to fight sexual
Violence; and a declaration by more than 20 brigade
commanders of our army who have pledged to follow
that plan; the establishment of an emergency call centre
aimed at helping victims to get immediate assistance;
prevention through a massive poster campaign entitled
"Break the Silence"; and the publication soon, with
the assistance of the International Criminal Court, of
a collection of the sentences in the cases mentioned
above. Finally, we instituted an aggressive policy of
promoting access to education for young girls by the
construction of 1,000 schools per year, the allocation of
a $100 million budget, and an increase in the share ofthe
national budget devoted to education from 6 per cent to
16 per cent over the past 4 years, with the resulting free
enrolment of 17 million Congolese children in primary
school, as opposed to 7 million in 2001, which has also
led to a modest improvement in the parity index.

Those improvements were due, to start with,
to the determination, will and substantial support
demonstrated by the Congolese Government, coupled
with the support of the international community. I have
mentioned the United Nations, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura;
Japan; the United Nations Population Fund; and
UNICEF. We are proud of being able to sustain that
effort but are certainly far from feeling satisfied.
Indeed, there remain enormous challenges before us,
but today, we, Congolese women and girls, having
paid a heavy price, have taken the decision to leave
victimhood behind, choosing the path of resilience in
order to take our destiny into our own hands as women,
no longer on our knees despite having been raped, but
rather standing to deal with those challenges, hoping
for a return to sustainable peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

There are no miracles. Those results were not
isolated and were not attained without the real passion
of the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, accompanied by the Government of Prime
Minister Matata Ponyo Mapon, through consistent
and courageous policies put in place for the long term,
geared towards development, not just emergency
measures. In 2014, our growth rate was 9.5 per cent and
the inflation rate was 1.03 per cent, which indicates that
perhaps we can now place our hope in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

