Ms. Lemos-Maniati: On behalf of NATO, it is a
special pleasure for me to be here today with the
Security Council to mark this important anniversary.

Exactly 10 years ago, the Security Council
adopted the important resolution 1325 (2000). It the
first resolution to address the impact of conflict on
women and the contribution that women can make to
solidifying peace. It recognizes that the major security,
economic and governance challenges of our time
cannot be solved without the protection and
participation of women at all levels of our society. As
such, resolution 1325 (2000) is truly a landmark
resolution which we must all live up to.

NATO is ready to play its full role by pursuing a
pragmatic approach. With our partners, we have agreed
on a comprehensive list of concrete actions to
mainstream gender perspectives into NATO's
partnership programmes. Resolution 1325 (2000) has
become a fully integrated element of NATO's
comprehensive approach to crisis management.

The Alliance currently has 150,000 women and
men engaged in operations from Afghanistan to the
Balkans, but also off the Horn of Africa. In these
gender-sensitive environments, we have made it clear
that the involvement of women in operations is crucial
if we want to establish relationships and trust with civil
society. It is important to ensure that women are
present, active and take decisions at all strategic,
operational and tactical levels.

In September 2009, NATO issued a military
directive to all NATO commanders and allied and
partner nations for the integration of resolution 1325
(2000) and gender perspectives in NATO military
organizations and the planning and execution of
operations. It included a strict code of behaviour for all
military personnel serving in NATO-led operations.
The directive paved the way for the deployment of
NATO's first military gender advisers in the
headquarters of the International Security Assistance
Force in the autumn of last year, complementing the
network of national gender advisers already fielded in
some of the provincial reconstruction teams in
Afghanistan. Gender advisers will also soon be
deployed to the Kosovo Force and begin work at the
level of our strategic commands. This approach has
enabled us to mainstream a gender perspective from
NATO's senior political level all the way to the tactical
engagement level of NATO troops in operations.

A related, important aspect is education and
training; it is one of the keys to changing mindsets.
Our education institutions are engaged in this process,
providing predeployment training for all civilian and
military personnel of peacekeeping operations.

But looking ahead, NATO intends to do more. We
will continue mainstreaming resolution 1325 (2000) in
our operations, recognizing that mainstreaming gender
perspectives requires a continuous and shared effort
until it becomes the norm. We will continue developing
education and training in civilian and military
frameworks. We will continue to engage with other
international organizations - including the United
Nations, the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) - as well
as with the civil society, to share our experiences,
lessons learned and best practices. Here, we welcome
the establishment of UN Women; we wish all the best
to Ms. Bachelet and are looking forward to working
with her.

We will continue encouraging nations to develop
national action plans and to promote the participation
of women in their armed forces. In Afghanistan, in
particular, we will continue to encourage women to
take their rightful place in shaping their country's
future. We will continue to support Afghan women's
networks, which play a key role in the development of
governance and social and economic development, and
to help train female police and security officers.
Finally, we will also enhance our efforts to mainstream
resolution 1325 (2000) in the Alliance's everyday
business. NATO must continue to become a modern
place of work where decisions can be taken
professionally and efficiently. For this to happen, a
healthy gender balance is as important.

One decade on from the adoption of the Security
Council's groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000), we
are confident that we can take the next steps. We will
remain committed to taking practical and pragmatic
actions with our allies and our partners. We will remain
active and engaged, and we look forward to continuing
our efforts and cooperation beyond this anniversary.
