Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Ithank Ambassador
Tete Antonio and, above all, the Deputy Secretary-
General for sharing their analyses of their important
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
northern Nigeria.

May I also commend the work of UN-Women and of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, who also took part in the
visit. Together, they have really brought home to us the
horrific, disproportionate impact that both those crises
have on civilians and in particular, on women and girls.
It is an impact that the Council knows only too well,
following our visit to the Lake Chad region in March,
but I am sure that none of us who were on that visit
will forget the stories of anguish that we heard then. We
heard so many of them from mothers or daughters who
had lost everything - their children, families, homes
and hope - all to Boko Haram.

Sadly, it seems that those stories are still being told.
Despite the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and Governments of the region, the suffering
continues, with over 2 million people still displaced
in the Lake Chad region - over 96 per cent of them
because of the insurgency. Similar stories can also be
heard loudly and clearly in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which now has the highest displaced
population in Africa. The reports emanating from the
Kasai regions should make us all sick to our stomachs.
They speak of mass graves, brutal killing and maiming,
including of women and children. They tell of rampant
sexual violence. Over 1,000 cases have been responded
to since the crisis began last year, with the actual
number of cases likely to be far higher.

That has sparked a crisis that has left 400,000
children at risk of severe acute malnutrition. Those two
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
northern Nigeria are different in many ways, and yet
they are product of the same vicious cycle. It is a cycle
of instability - one that breeds violence and leads to
a breakdown of law and order. It is a cycle that allows
groups like Boko Haram to flourish and carry out those
most heinous crimes.

Put simply, we need to break the cycle. By we,
I mean all of us, including the Security Council,
but responsibility must fall first and foremost to
the Governments affected. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Government
of Nigeria have a duty to restore stability because
instability fuels crises. As they do so, they must respect
human rights and international humanitarian law. They
cannot be part of the problem if they want to be part of
the solution.

That means that Governments must protect civilians
as they restore stability. It means that they must act on
allegations of human rights abuses, including sexual
violence, irrespective of whether they are allegations
against their own forces or any other group and that
includes United Nations peacekeepers too. It means
Governments holding to account those who have
committed such crimes, showing that there can be no
impunity or escape and that the rule of law applies
to everyone.

We need to help them in that effort. That is why
the United Kingdom, together with our United Nations
and non-governmental organization partners, are
supporting the Nigerian Government to re-establish
basic social services to areas that they have stabilized. It
is why we pledged $6 million to support to humanitarian
response in the Kasais, and why we support the Human
Rights Council's unanimous decision to deploy a team
of experts to look into the situation there. It is why
we provide training to the Nigerian armed forces and
to African peacekeeping contingents on protecting
civilians and on preventing sexual and gender-based
violence. And it is why the United Kingdom is funding
legal assistance in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to help the survivors of those crimes.

But ultimately, those are all comparatively short-
term actions. To end the crises that afflict so many
women and girls disproportionately in both the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria, we
need to see long-term progress on the women and
peace and security agenda. At its heart, that means
women's equality in all aspects ofpolitics, Government
and society. It is unacceptable that women continue
to be so poorly represented in formal governance and
peace processes when, time after time, studies show
that women's participation in such processes aids their
ultimate success.

In Nigeria, for instance, women's participation
in the House of Representatives and the Senate has
fallen since 2011. It now stands at around 5 per cent.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, only two
women were involved in discussions to reach a political
agreement during the crisis last year. Had just one more
woman been involved, they would have matched the total
number of women sitting around this table representing
the member States of the Security Council. Whether
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Nigeria
or, indeed, in the Security Council, let us all advocate
for the full active participation of women. Women have
spent too long enduring and surviving these crises. It
is long past time for them to play their fullest part in
solving them.

