Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
United Kingdom Secretary of State of Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs, Mr. Hague, for presiding over
today's debate and the Ministers of Guatemala, France
and Morocco for their statements.

We deeply appreciate the Secretary-General's
special briefing today, his leadership on combating
sexual violence in armed conflict and his recent
visits to meet the victims of sexual Violence. Special
Representative Zainab Bangura has, in a short span of
time, injected a sense of urgency for intensified action.
We pay a tribute to her for her passion and hard work.
Ms. Angelina Jolie's personal commitment and strong
advocacy of women's rights have produced results.

The United Kingdom delegation's succinct concept
note (S/2013/335, annex) has guided our preparations
for this debate. We especially applaud the leadership
role of the United States in the Security Council on
women, peace and security. We thank the United States
delegation for working skilfully and inclusively to forge
consensus on resolution 2106 (2013), adopted today.

As the briefers have substantiated once again
today, the vile crime of sexual violence in armed
conflict is a growing phenomenon. Women, girls, men
and boys are all targeted, but women bear the brunt of
sexual atrocities in wars and armed conflicts. They
are harassed, molested, raped, maimed and disabled.
Other forms of violence - sexual slavery, commercial
sexual exploitation, forced pregnancies and enforced
sterilization - are rampant. Such violence assaults
human dignity, ruins the lives of survivors and their
families, and subjects communities and societies to
torture and trauma. Sexual violence in armed conflicts
is used to force the displacement of populations,
illegally acquire natural resources, eliminate political
opponents and punish ethnic and religious groups.

Security Council resolutions over the years have
established that systematic sexual violence, used as
an instrument of war, is a grave threat to international
peace and security. By now, we have developed a
strong normative and institutional framework to fight
that scourge. The erroneous thesis that sexual violence
in armed conflict is a cultural phenomenon has been
rejected. Yet, we know that the implementation of
decisions has been slow and monitoring indifferent.
Those who commit, command and condone sexual
Violence still, by and large, act with impunity.

Resolution 2106 (21303), adopted today, will
have an impact on implementation as it translates the
Secretary-General's recommendations into concrete
decisions. The Security Council, by today's resolution,
calls for targeted sanctions against perpetrators. It
equips different bodies and entities with tools to oppose
impunity, empowers women to seek redress, strengthens
international political response and fosters national
ownership. The Council's call for the immediate
cessation of acts of sexual violence and implementation
of time-bound commitments should be heeded by all
parties to armed conflicts. Those calls are not abstract.
They should resonate to real life situations in the
Syria Arab Republic, Guinea-Bissau, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic
and other armed conflicts.

It is important that measures against sexual violence
be made an integral part of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform processes.
Before these exercises are started, mechanisms should
be put in place for women's protection. More women
should sit at the table where decisions are made on peace
and ceasefire accords, peacekeeping, stabilization and
reconstruction. As the French Minister said so aptly,
women should be stakeholders, not subjects.

It is imperative to mainstream a gender perspective
into peacekeeping operations. As one of the largest
troop-contributing countries, Pakistan can testify that
the appointment of gender advisers in the field has been
very useful. Adequate resources should be allocated
for that purpose. Pakistani women peacekeepers have
served as police officers, doctors and nurses in missions
in Asia, Africa and the Balkans. We have made gender
sensitization a mandatory part of the training of our
peacekeepers.

To conclude, I emphasize that we should also devote
energies to addressing the root causes of conflicts.
While the Council takes punitive measures against
perpetrators, its efforts are strengthened by the voice
of the global citizens who help us nurture a culture
of zero tolerance of unconscionable acts of sexual
violence. In this context, the perspective of Ms. Jane
Adong Anywar of NGO Women's Initiatives for Gender
Justice is important and directly relevant to our work.

