Mr. Antonio: On behalf of the African Union
Commission, I wish to first congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country's accession to the
Presidency of the Security Council for October, and
to express the African Union's (AU) gratitude for the
opportunity to take part in this open debate on a theme
of critical importance to Africa, a continent plagued
by pockets of conflicts, including a number of post-
conflict situations.

Experience has shown that addressing issues of
rule of law and transitional justice in those conflict
and post-conflict situations has become an urgent and
indispensable prerequisite for achieving sustainable
peace and stability. Equally important is the need
to address the gender dimension and to find ways to
tackle issues of rule of law and transitional justice
from a gender perspective. In that regard, I wish to
join previous speakers in their recommendation of
the importance and the content of the resolution 2122
(2013) adopted by the Council today. I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for the report (S/2013/525) before us
today. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN Women;
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations Commissioner
for Human Rights; and Ms. Brigitte Balipou of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

The African Union reaffirms its support for the
advancement of holistic justice for women in situations
of conflict, post-conflict, political Violence and gross
human rights violations. African Union documents,
such as the Constitutive Act, enshrine a commitment to
the advancement of gender equality and the protection
of women from gender-based and other forms of
violence. Furthermore, the prevention, protection and
promotion of women's rights have been aptly addressed
in the 2003 Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and People's Rights on the Rights of Women, the 2004
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa, and
the 2009 African Union Gender Policy, which contains
provisions on mainstreaming gender equality.

The African Union takes cognizance of its
member States' international commitments in respect
of women's rights, most notably Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security, and thus
acknowledges and supports the efforts of those African
States and regional bodies that have taken concrete steps
towards implementing those resolutions. Some notable
examples are Liberia, which has developed an action
plan and indicators for implementing resolution 1325
(2000), and the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region, which is in the process of developing a
regional protocol on sexual and gender-based Violence.

Despite those notable advances, much more
remains to be done on the continent to ensure that
justice and accountability for violations, particularly
against women, are brought to bear and that redress for
the victims is provided in order to ensure that crimes
perpetrated against them during conflicts are never
repeated.

While transitional justice mechanisms and processes
are entrenched at the national level, the African Union
and subregional bodies continue to play a pivotal role
in influencing the adoption and implementation of
transitional justice processes on the continent. Indeed,
the AU organs have become increasingly involved in
negotiating transition in States emerging from conflict
and in fashioning approaches to address past human
rights atrocities.

To that end, the African Union Commission,
with the technical support of civil society partners,
are leading in the development of the African Union
Transitional Justice Policy Framework. The Transitional
Justice Policy Framework emerged from the report
by the AU Panel of the Wise entitled Non-impunity,
truth, peace, justice and reconciliation in Africa:
opportunities and constraints. The report interrogates
the polarized peace-versus-justice debate that seems
to be the focus of international justice discourse in
Africa, while seeking to offer a middle ground and an
African regional perspective that takes into account the
complexities and nuances within the African context,
including continental approaches to non-impunity,
truth, peace, justice and reconciliation in Africa. The
report of the Panel of Wise also concludes that the
AU has a sound track record of pronouncements and
engagement related to addressing impunity in Africa, in
spite of some challenges of coherence and coordination
in implementation.

The proposed policy framework is intended to
serve as a guide that is adaptable and applicable to
individual countries or subregions emerging from
conflicts and/or repressive rule to assist in the pursuit
of accountability, sustainable peace, justice and
reconciliation. The African Union Commission has
therefore held several consultative meetings, with
the technical support of the Centre for the Study of
Violence and Reconciliation, South Africa and other
stakeholders. The consultation in Lorne, for example,
focused specifically on mainstreaming gender into the
policy framework and was undertaken with the support
of UN Women. During the meeting, specific language
on women and gender considerations for the policy
framework was developed.

The African Union looks forward to the adoption of
the policy framework and remains convinced that this
document will be make a significant contribution to

"comprehensively promote justice and
accountability in ways that further the equal rights
of women and the right to equal participation in
decision-making" (S/2013/587, annex, p. 2).

Let me conclude by reiterating the African Union's
appreciation for this opportunity to contribute to this
open debate.

