Mr. Kolga (Estonia): My delegation fully aligns
itself with the statement made earlier by the
representative of the European Union.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for the encouraging remarks he made this
morning.

For a start, I would like to emphasize that
women's security is part of overall peace and security
and that women can contribute to peace processes and
are very able to do so. Here, I would like to use the
same quotation of Aristotle that the Estonian President
used during the General Assembly's general debate this
year (see A/66/PV.11, p. 47). Aristotle noted that where
the state of women is bad, almost half of human life is
spoiled. That is no less true today - and it will remain
so. I therefore welcome this Security Council debate to
discuss women's participation and role in conflict
prevention and mediation. The involvement of women
in peacekeeping operations and conflict prevention is
of the utmost importance to ensure the success of the
operations, as it is the only way to reach the whole
population.

In October of last year Estonia adopted its first
National Action Plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions,
which sets out our priorities for the future. We are now
in the process of reviewing the implementation of the
Action Plan over the past year. The purpose of the
National Action Plan is to ensure that Estonia's
international military and civil contributions and
development cooperation take women's needs
systematically into account. It contains commitments
to include the gender perspective in those activities.

One of the countries closely connected to the
implementation of our Action Plan has been
Afghanistan, where NATO and Estonia have jointly
endeavoured to promote the involvement and
advancement of women. In November 2010, Estonia
organized an international conference, entitled
"Women, Peace and Security - the Afghan View",
focused on the cooperation between national and
international contributors.

The National Action Plan also includes Estonia's
commitments regarding resolution 1325 (2000) that
stem from our role as a contributor to international
peace and security through our active participation in
international civilian and military operations, as a
donor country and a member of the European Union,
NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations.

The Action Plan also seeks to raise general
awareness and interest in gender-related issues in our
own society and to increase gender-related expertise.
We support women's participation in posts related to
peace and security and will take further steps to
increase women's participation in military, police and
rescue services. In the future, we would like to
integrate the gender perspective into our pre-mission
training even more. It is also our aim to consider
gender-related issues during the general training of
officers and non-commissioned officers.

At the international level, we want resolution
1325 (2000) to remain an important political subject in
the United Nations, OSCE, the European Union and
NATO in an ongoing way. We welcome the United
Nations strategic results framework and the set of
indicators on women and peace and security, which
guide the implementation of resolutions, and we also
welcome the comprehensive report on the NATO/
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council policy on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions. In addition, we believe that the
International Criminal Court has an important role to
play in ending impunity in crimes against women.

Finally, let me note our appreciation of the work
of Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director of
UN-Women, whose leadership in that role is of crucial
importance to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). We also expect that UN-Women will play an

active role in helping to turn the principles of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security from words on paper into reality. I would also
like to extend our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed
Conflict for their involvement.

