Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): 1 am
very pleased and honoured to be participating once
again in an open debate of the Security Council. My
presence here on this occasion is due to several reasons.

First, it is a clear signal of our continued support
for this United Nations forum. Secondly, it is in
response to Secretary Hague's kind and timely personal
invitation, extended some months ago when we met in
London to discuss various multilateral issues of mutual
interest to the United Kingdom and Guatemala; this
issue in particular was very high on the agenda on that
occasion. Thirdly, it highlights the importance of the
issue, which was also addressed during our presidency
of the Council last October, during which the Council
issued presidential statement S/PRST/2012/23.

Fourthly, I should say that in my professional life I
have always been concerned with the grave problem of
Violence against women in general and on the impact it
has on every aspect of economic and social development.
This type of Violence, which is particularly associated
with the impunity that results from weak rule of law
institutions, will surely form part, among other things,
of the post-2015 development agenda that we will be
debating in the General Assembly. Finally, I can state
that President Otto Perez Molina views combating
violence against women as an absolute priority of his
Government. If we do not eradicate gender violence
we will not have security and peace in Guatemala or
anywhere else in the world.

Before moving on, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the concept note you have circulated
(S/2013/335, annex), and to express our appreciation to
the briefers we have heard today, especially Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Zainab Bangura. We are
also grateful for the Secretary-General's most recent
report (S/2013/ 149), and would like to express our
appreciation to the delegations of India and Rwanda for
having organized debates on the subject during their
respective presidencies in November 2012 and April
this year.

Sexual violence in situations of armed conflict
is an unacceptable phenomenon, a crime against
humanity, and an insult to the world's conscience, as
expressed through the actions of the Security Council
and every organ of the United Nations. It has been the
subject of numerous debates, presidential statements
and resolutions of the Council in this very Chamber. Its
development is built on the basic premise of resolution
1325 (2000), which is that without security for women,
lasting peace is impossible. That was followed by
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010),
and has culminated today in the adoption of resolution
2106 (2013), aimed at expanding the conceptual
framework of the struggle against this scourge. At
the same time, we have established concrete policies,
including the creation of the post presently occupied
by Ms. Bangura and the assignment of experts to many
peacekeeping operations, among others.

However, the phenomenon persists, as we have
sadly seen in situations such as those in Syria, Mali, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of Congo. In other words, the Council is acting, but,
without denying the value of our proactive stance, we
must recognize that our concrete impact on the ground
continues to be relatively modest. The question we must
ask, then, is what more can we do so that our decisions
are translated into concrete action?

One promising approach lies in insisting more
firmly that States make an ongoing priority of rule of
law reform and strengthening their national institutions,
including the civil and military justice systems, in order
to address sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations, and to combat impunity for those that
commit this type of crime. For that we unquestionably
need political will, as we have heard, but we also need
effective institutions. It is equally crucial to act on
current situations where most of the victims of such
crimes face a wall of impunity. We must act so that
the truth comes out regarding the suffering of women
and so that the perpetrators are held accountable for
their acts. Acknowledging the truth and undertaking
efforts aimed at achieving justice and promoting
reconciliation are the minimum we should do to restore
and re-establish the dignity of the victims.

Guatemala's own internal conflict was resolved
over 15 years ago, but there still are hundreds of
victims of sexual violence committed by various armed
perpetrators. Happily, and as I have already indicated,
preventing violence against women is a priority of
the Guatemalan State today. We recently enacted
a law against murder and other forms of violence
against women, and one prohibiting sexual violence,
exploitation and human trafficking, which has enabled
us to reform the codification of various crimes in the
Guatemalan penal code. Furthermore, in a measure
designed to improve the access of female victims of
violence to justice, various programmes have been
established in the executive and judicial branches to
help eliminate impunity as it affects women. In that
regard, our Ministry of the Interior, the Office of the
Prosecutor and the courts, with technical and financial
support from various United Nations agencies, have
strengthened their capacity for prosecuting crimes
related to violence against women.

As has been done in Guatemala, the issue of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations should
be reflected in concrete decisions included in peace
accords, especially in matters related to security and
transitionaljustice. We support the Council's promotion
of peace and reconciliation processes and agreements
ending conflicts that address the issue explicitly and
thus promote respect for the dignity of victims.

Finally, Guatemala strongly supports the
elimination of obstacles to women's access to justice in
conflict and post-conflict situations. That was one of
the subjects of presidential statement S/PRST/2012/23,
issued under Guatemala's presidency of the Security
Council in October. As part ofthe fight against impunity
regarding sexual violence, that statement also included
a firm condemnation of all acts against women and
girls that violate international law on armed-conflict
and post-conflict situations.

Before concluding, I would like to go off script
to mention that my l3-year-old daughter Laura is
with me in this Chamber. At 13 years of age I met a
victim of sexual violence in conflict for the first time,
a woman who was tortured and raped about 40 times.
Subsequently, I have to say that I have witnessed
such victims in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, Brazil and Colombia. We
are thus discussing an issue that many Latin American
women have suffered from. I would like to say here,
before my 13-year-old daughter, that in the twenty-
first century the world needs freedom and dignity for
women and security for them in their lives, so that no
young girl or adolescent can ever suffer sexual violence
because of an armed conflict or any other circumstance.

In conclusion, we cannot sit by impassably in the
face of any kind of sexual violence as a cause or result
of armed conflict. We must combat it with every means
at our disposal, not only by promoting awareness of
its scale, scope and characteristics but also by taking
specific actions to address it decisively.

