Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Sir, allow me to thank your
delegation for having brought such an important issue
for discussion before the Security Council.
The most important Security Council resolution
on the role of women in peacebuilding and conflict
prevention is now 15 years old. The Republic of
Paraguay joins the commemoration of the adoption of
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). The resolution
is important not only because it is the first to point
out the inextricable link between gender equality and
the participation of women in international peace and
security, but also because it recognizes the particular
impact of armed conflict on women and the role they
play in peace processes and post-war rehabilitation.

The Republic of Paraguay, which has participated
actively in peacekeeping operations since 1993,
reaffirms its commitment to prevention, protection
and the participation of women before, during and,
where necessary, after conflicts. In this regard,
the Government of Paraguay, taking into account
its international commitments to contributing to
peacebuilding and the need to integrate the gender
perspective into conflict prevention, management and
resolution, recently finalized its national action plan,
which will allow it to implement the mandates set out in
resolution 1325 (2000). The national action plan, which
will be officially released later this month, is the fruit
of the efforts and coordination carried out by various
national institutions since 2012, including the Ministry
of Women, the Ministry of National Defence, the
Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, with the valuable support and continuing
assistance of UN-Women, of which we are a faithful
ally.

In 2015, our country has enjoyed the highest
percentage of female participation in awareness
programmes and training for peace operations. Some
27 per cent of participants are women, and we hope to
see this percentage increase through the efforts of the
relevant institutions to promote the greater participation
of women in the contingents of peacekeeping missions
in which Paraguay is a participant. The main obstacles
that prevent women's full participation in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding can bee linked to gender-based
discrimination and women's economic and social
exclusion, situations that entail the denial of women's
rights. That is why it is so important to work to
strengthen women's human rights from a perspective
that includes devoting attention to their economic,
social and cultural rights.

Numerous experiences in conflict and post-
conflict situations have proven that the exclusion of
women from peace processes not only undermines the
promotion and protection of their human rights but also
reduces the probabilities of lasting peace and future
development for all the citizens of a given country.

The inclusion of a gender perspective in every
aspect of peacebuilding, including conflict prevention,
management and resolution, requires, first and foremost,
the political will to include women in decision-making
processes. Without the participation of women there
can be neither a gender agenda nor political decisions
that reflect a gender perspective.

As we celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we call on Member States to
ensure that all resolutions and initiatives on women
and peace and security are implemented with specific
measures that ensure women's effective participation in
peacebuilding activities under equitable conditions.

