Ms. Bethel (Bahamas): Like previous speakers, I
would like to commend you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in organizing this important event.

This meeting marks an important milestone -
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). My delegation praises the valiant efforts
of the countless people who have worked tirelessly to
put women at the centre of global efforts for peace, not
only in responding to their needs as victims, but 4
equally importantly - in drawing on women's talents
as peacemakers. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/498), notable efforts have
been made by the United Nations system, Member
States, civil society and other actors across a broad
range of areas. We have seen increased participation of
women in decision-making roles and peacekeeping
operations, which is indicative of the important role
that women can and must play in the development of
peace.

However, despite this progress, we continue to
receive shocking reports of atrocious abuses and sexual
violence against women in conflict zones, as recently
occurred in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Warring parties must first and foremost halt all
systematic and individual abuses against women. My
delegation believes that the Security Council and the
international community as a whole owe it to these
victims and others around the world to do much more
to prevent such crimes, punish the perpetrators and
establish conditions where violence against women is
treated like the societal anathema it is. The Council has
a special responsibility to enable the United Nations to
do the best job it can on this front.

This meeting is an opportunity for us all to
declare our commitment to achieving this goal. But it
should be more. It should spark concrete action,
through a more coherent and coordinated approach
geared towards helping women, not next year or next
month, but right now, today.

My fellow countrywomen and countrymen in the
Bahamas count ourselves most fortunate, for we have
no first-hand knowledge of the horrors and ravages of
war and civil strife. Nonetheless, we feel the pain and
suffering of our fellow human beings caught up in
conflict and war in other parts of the world,
particularly the women and children who are
disproportionately affected by such negative
circumstances. As noted by Martin Luther King, Jr.,
"Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere",
and one might correctly extrapolate from that notable
quote that conflict anywhere is a threat to peace
everywhere. For this reason, we feel compelled to lend
our voice to this important debate today and to
recognize the important role of women in this process.

In recognition of the meaningful participation of
women at all stages of the peace process, including
disarmament, and in the integration of a gender
perspective, we note the recent introduction of a draft
resolution in the First Committee (A/C.1/65/L.39),
spearheaded by our sister Caribbean Community
country of Trinidad and Tobago, on women,
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation, and
we welcome this as another important step in the right
direction.

We welcome the fact that since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council has given
this issue increased attention. But we urge members of
the Council and all other countries to back these
declarations and directives with appropriate resources:
police, troops, funds, equipment and training. These
are solid tools that can be used in assisting individual
women to surmount their circumstances and contribute
to lasting peace and the development of their
communities and countries. Currently, just 8 per cent
of the 13,000 United Nations police officers are
women. The Organization must promote the
recruitment and training of more skilled women, not
only as police officers but at all levels, especially in
leadership positions.

The Secretary-General's assertion that "securing
lasting peace and security requires commitment and
ownership of decisions by Member States as well as all
parties to armed conflict" (S/2010/498, para. 81) should
serve as an axiom undergirding all our efforts in this
regard. It is an axiom that cuts across gender lines,
cultures and levels of development, and it demands the
support of us all. If we can empower all of the good
words and positive intentions in this Chamber with real
action, that will unleash the much more transformative
power of the world's women and usher in a better future
for all. This must be done with the full engagement,
participation, cooperation and support of men.

Finally, we are greatly encouraged by the
appointments of Margot Wallstrom as the Secretary-
General's Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and Michelle Bachelet as the Executive
Director of UN Women. My delegation is confident
that the leadership roles these two women will play in
their respective arenas will greatly advance the causes
that have brought us together today, and I assure them
both of my delegation's support and cooperation.

