Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, as well as the
statement just delivered by the representative of Ghana
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the African Women
Leaders Network.

In the open debate on 11 April (see S/PV.8508),
we emphasized that the women and peace and security
agenda is, for Spain, one ofthe main axes ofthe Council's
work. Today, we wish to reiterate that message further.

Spain is a pioneer in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda and its
fundamental pillars of participation, prevention and
protection. Participation reaffirms the principle that
a lasting solution to a conflict is only possible with
the effective and full participation of women. With
prevention and protection, we seek to prevent sexual
violence and the exploitation of women, as well as
guarantee reparation to survivors and move forward in
the fight against impunity.

Moreover, Violence impacts women's access to
basic social services and the enjoyment of their rights,
especially their sexual and reproductive rights. Together,
we must continue to make progress in investigating cases
of sexual violence in conflict and holding perpetrators
to account in order to achieve effective prevention and
a strong, survivor-centred response.

In that regard, Spain strongly supports the work
of the German presidency on that issue in their efforts
to achieve the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019),
which includes elements of great importance such as
accountability and drawing attention to cases of sexual
violence against men and boys. However, Spain regrets
the fact that resolution 2467 (2019) does not reflect
the need to provide assistance to survivors, through
non-discriminatory and comprehensive health services,
including sexual and reproductive health, as stated in
resolution 2106 (2013), the text of which we consider
to be fully relevant and a key reference point for the
women and peace and security agenda.

Spain will continue to financially support
initiatives to combat sexual violence in conflict and
will take gender indicators into account in the process
of earmarking funds. We also support the International
Committee of the Red Cross special programme to
combat sexual violence, as reflected in the Humanitarian
Action Strategy of the Spanish Cooperation for the
period 2019-2026. We ask the Security Council to
include sexual Violence in its sanctions regimes, as we
believe it is crucial to ensure interaction between the
sanctions committees and the Special Representative
for Sexual Violence in Conflict.

In a month's time, Spain will hold the third
Conference on Safe Schools in Palma de Mallorca,
which will address the gender impact of attacks on
access to education, as girls and women are especially
vulnerable to such attacks. We believe that women
and peace and security and safe schools are intimately
linked with each other. Spain strongly supports the
Safe Schools Declaration, which is a useful instrument
to facilitate safe access to education. It is also a
fundamental element for the effective participation
of women in public life and the eradication of gender
violence. We therefore urge the entire international
community to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.

Furthermore, I reiterate my Government's
invitation to all Member States to participate in the
Third Conference on Safe Schools. Our goal is for
the Conference to serve as a driving force for further
developments. In that context, we demand that parties
to conflicts put an end attacks on schools, universities,
students and teachers, which result in an increased risk
of sexual violence.

We wish to see the adoption of concrete national
deterrence measures against the use of schools by
armed forces and armed groups, which also increases
the risk of sexual violence against students and teachers.
We would like disaggregated data on cases of sexual
violence impacting access to education, as a form of
prevention, mitigation and accountability.

In conclusion, Spain will continue to fight against
sexual violence in conflict as part of our efforts
to eradicate gender-based violence everywhere.
Prevention begins in times ofpeace, with robust national
legislation that has a clear deterrent effect. Those same
legal instruments must allow for effective reparation
for survivors, as well as prosecute and sentence those
responsible. Our ultimate goal is to eradicate gender-
based violence.

