Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we thank the Japanese
presidency for having convened today's meeting. We
also congratulate Ms. Margot Wallstrom on her
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
are prepared to cooperate with her in fulfilment of her
mandate.

We believe that the efforts of the Special
Representative should aim first and foremost at
supporting those countries that suffer most acutely
from the problem of sexual violence in armed conflict.
At the same time, close cooperation with the Security
Council and Member States is very important. It is also
important that we not duplicate the efforts of other
bodies and mechanisms of the United Nations system
on gender issues. We are convinced that such an
approach will contribute to the effective protection of
the rights of women in armed conflict.

The fight against sexual violence is part and
parcel of a comprehensive set of measures on conflict
resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. We are
convinced that the question of women and peace and
security should not be reduced exclusively to the issue
of sexual violence, to the total exclusion of other forms
of violence against women in conflict. That is the
balanced approach taken in the drafting of resolution
1325 (2000), which remains the key benchmark in
protecting women and ensuring their rights in conflict.

We commend the timely issuance of the report of
the Secretary-General contained in document
S/2010/l73, and thank Ms. Mayanja for her briefing.
The indicators proposed will allow us effectively to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to better
understand the tasks required of the international
community in protecting the rights of women in
conflict and evaluate progress to that end. We also
believe that the indicators referred to the in the
Secretary-General's report require careful
consideration, which will certainly take some time, and
further substantial development. It is critical that
further work on the indicators be completely
transparent because, ultimately, their importance
extends far beyond the exclusive interest of members
of the Security Council.

We hope that, in the framework of the preparation
of the Secretary-General's October report, work on the
indicators will continue. At the same time, the wish
expressed in the draft presidential statement - for the
development of new indicators that have been the
subject of broad discussion, and the inclusion in that
document of a programme of work containing roles and
responsibilities vis-a-vis the indicators within the
United Nations system - will be taken into account in
that regard.

In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm our conviction
that we can ensure the rights and protection of women
in armed conflict only through the joint efforts of all
stakeholders. Resolution 1325 (2000), the tenth
anniversary of which we shall celebrate in October,
remains the main benchmark in that regard.

