Mr. Guehenno: I am grateful for the opportunity
to participate in this discussion, as we prepare to mark,
this October, the second anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace and
security.

Before addressing the areas in which the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) has
made concrete progress in implementing that
resolution, I would like to say something on a personal
note. When I arrived at the head of the DPKO, almost
two years ago, I sensed from various quarters some
scepticism about the dialogue about gender
mainstreaming. Many appeared to misperceive it as a
superficial exercise in political correctness. I should
confess that I was not always immune from this
misperception.

It is now plainly obvious, though, that such an
attitude is not only misguided; it is also a drastic
misunderstanding of what gender mainstreaming is all
about. Gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping is about
recognizing that all segments of society are affected by
conflict, sometimes in different ways, and that all
segments of society also have a role to play in helping
to end the violence and lay the foundation for
sustainable peace.

Traditionally, we have underestimated this point,
because we wrongly assumed that conflict and peace
are gender-blind. They are not. Certain crimes, whose
incidents can increase in a conflict setting, are
specifically targeted at women and girls. Certain efforts
at reconciliation have a totally different dynamic when
women are included in the peace process. In some case,
women's groups comprise individuals who were not
engaged in combat, and thus might be more open to
dialogue. In other cases, the women's group concerns
can be more radicalized, because they consist of those
whose husbands, fathers and sons were killed during
the fighting. Furthermore, we should not assume that
all combatants are men. There are women combatants,
and, sadly, child soldiers as well.

The need for heightened gender perspective
applies to all areas of work in a peacekeeping mission,
including in areas one might otherwise overlook. Take,
for example, a very small but illustrative case.

In East Timor, the United Nations was given the
unprecedented role of administering the territory. This
included running the prisons and building correctional
facilities. It may not immediately occur to many that
not all prisoners are men. There are women who
commit crimes, and they are in quite separate prison
facilities. As a result, there is a requirement to hire
women corrections officers, often through proactive
recruitment.

In order to properly budget for these distinct
requirements, among others, one needs to be able to
forecast crime rates among women. The United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), facing urgent demands, did not think about
this until its work was considerably advanced. It thus
had to address this issue post facto, once the
recruitment process for prison guards was almost
complete. Taking all of these factors into account is not
political correctness. It is just part of the job.

The example that I have just given is a very small
one among hundreds. There can be a gender dimension
to virtually every aspect of what peacekeepers do,
whether it would be dealing with the perpetrators of
crime, the victims of violence, or the political actors
and civic leaders with whom the real prospects of
sustainable peace reside. Recognizing these facts and
taking action accordingly is what gender
mainstreaming is all about.

As far as DPKO is concerned, we do not need
further convincing that gender awareness must feature
more prominently in our work. I am pleased to report
that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
made some concrete progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) within specific peacekeeping
operations, notably in East Timor, in Kosovo, in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in Sierra Leone and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Five special focus
areas stand out in particular, as follows: addressing
gender-based violence; responding to the trafficking in
women and children; incorporating gender perspectives
into the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of refugees and displaced persons,
including former combatants; facilitating the
participation of women in constitutional and electoral
reform and civil administration; and lastly, combating
the spread of HIV/AIDS. We have done quite a lot of
work in each of these five areas, though in deference to
time limitation on our opening statement, I will just
note a few highlights at this stage.

Since the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) launched a nationwide
domestic violence project in November 2001, more
than 300 cases of domestic violence and sexual abuse
have been reported and acted upon by the police. Anti-
trafficking efforts of UNMIBH have been enhanced
since March 1999, by creating the so-called STOP
programme - Special Trafficking Operations
Project- in July 2001, which has since conducted
over 400 operations against bars and brothels. Some
1,442 women and girls have been interviewed and
offered assistance with repatriation. Three safe houses
for trafficking victims have been established in
coordination with the International Organization for
Migration.

In Kosovo, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo promulgated a
Trafficking in Human Persons Regulation for the
protection of victims.

In the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, mission personnel
received training and advice on how to mainstream the
gender perspective into all areas of their work. This
covers all areas from human rights monitoring,
including dealing with crimes of sexual abuse, gender
violence and exploitation, to dealing with the different
needs of male and female, and child, ex-combatants.

In East Timor - which is perhaps the best
example of how maintaining the focus on gender, or
gender mainstreaming, can yield significant results -
political parties voluntarily included women on the
tickets after considerable debate within the Timorese
civil society. As a result, women represented 27 per
cent of the total number of candidates returned to the
Constituent Assembly, the highest percentage ever
under a United Nations-sponsored election.

At Headquarters, a handbook on
multidimensional peacekeeping operations is being
finalized, which features a key chapter on gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping, as well as best
practices and lessons learned from mission
experiences. In addition, in collaboration with the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues
(OSAGI), we are developing specific guidelines for
different elements of peacekeeping operations on
mainstreaming gender issues, and monitoring and
evaluating the outcomes.
Lastly, I should like to reiterate that the
Secretary-General maintains a zero-tolerance policy on
the engagement of peacekeepers in acts of sexual
exploitation, harassment, and trafficking of women and
girls. We urge troop- and police-contributing countries
to take appropriate disciplinary, and if needed, criminal
action against a national who commits such acts. For
its part, the Department is improving preventive
measures and strengthening its policies and procedures
for disciplinary action against anyone accused of being
involved in such unacceptable acts. Our training
material and the admission programmes are being
revised to place particular emphasis on this point.

Furthermore, through collaborations with United
Nations and national partners, and by the deployment
of HIV-AIDS policy officers in four field missions,
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE), United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
and United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), we are developing and implementing
strategies to reduce transmission of HIV-AIDS.

Much of the progress we have achieved to date in
our missions in East Timor, Kosovo, Bosnia-
Herzegovina, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Sierra Leone is in large part due to the presence of
full-time gender advisers. They make a real difference
in ensuring that all parts of an operation are made
aware of the gender dimensions of their work,
beginning first by speaking to the women of the
country concerned, who are best placed to set the
agenda in a way that is sensitive to local traditions and
context.

Gender advisers offer suggestions on practical
steps to address gender concerns in a manner
appropriate to each unique mission circumstance and,
consequently, significantly enhance our ability to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). While much has
been done to date, far more remains to be done, both in
the field and at Headquarters.

In conclusion, much of what I have said about the
importance of gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping
may seem self-evident today. Yet the fact that a few
years ago these same ideas may not have been
understood as clearly is a testament to the ability of
Council debate to alter our thinking and approach.

Put simply, the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) has precipitated a change in
perceptions and it is natural that this process of change
can sometimes be slow, face setbacks and scepticism.
Inevitably, however, misguided cynicism will be
overtaken by the facts. It is only a matter of time.

