Mr. Ruzicka (Slovakia): In a few days, millions
of people will celebrate the holiday season with
families and friends, joyously giving and sharing.
Just yesterday, the Security Council was able to
adopt unanimously resolution 2328 (2016) to deploy
observers to Aleppo - one of many steps to be taken
to give millions of refugees and people in need the best
gift, namely, a decent life in peace. Only several hours
later, we heard about the terrible attacks in Berlin,
Istanbul and Zurich. Our feelings and thoughts are
with the families and friends of those who perished in
those horrible attacks. Our sympathy goes out to our
colleagues from Russia, Germany and Switzerland. But,
honestly, the four minutes allotted for my intervention
will not be enough to name all the countries that have
had to experience terrorist attacks just this year.

Yet today we are discussing another phenomenon
that is taking, or severely affecting, millions of lives,
mostly young ones. Modern slavery is happening all
around us in various forms, both in developed and in
developing countries, affecting rich and poor societies,
albeit in different ways. Human trafficking is the third-
largest international criminal industry. It reportedly
generates a profit of $32 billion every year. In next
four minutes of my statement, it will have generated
approximately $250,000. Of the sum total of revenue
generated, $15.5 billion is being made in industrialized
countries. According to the International Labour
Organization, forced labour in the private economy
generates an estimated $150 billion in illegal profits
annually, which is approximately twice the gross
domestic product of my country for 2015.

For every minute that we speak, at least one person
is trafficked across international borders. Between
600,000 to 800,000 people are trafficked every year. Of
those, 80 per cent are female or children. Trafficking for
forced labour or sexual exploitation or for harvesting
tissue, cells and organs represents the cruellest type
of international organized crime and is well fuelled by
poverty or conflict. We must do more than express our
strong condemnation of trafficking in persons. Modern
slavery undermines human dignity and human rights
and affects human development. Let me make several
points - seven, to be exact - that Slovakia considers
important in effectively handling this crime.

First, we need to make better use of the existing
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. The need to promote the universal
ratification of the Convention and to adopt effective
national plans and strategies for its implementation is
a must.

Second, the Sustainable Development Goals
specifically address human trafficking in the targets of
Goals 5, 8, and 16. That gives hope that confronting the
grave human rights violations that we are addressing
today will become a priority for all the countries in
the world.

Third, the nexus between trafficking and conflict-
related sexual violence is evident. Armed conflict leads
to increased trafficking in women and sexual assaults
on women and girls. It is crucial that all countries fulfil
their international obligations concerning women and
armed conflict, such as the commitments in the 1995
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
milestone resolution 1325 (2000).

Fourth, protecting trafficking victims and saving
lives should be of the utmost priority for the entire
international community. As stated in the Council's
presidential statement issued in December 2015,

"The Security Council urges relevant United
Nations agencies operating in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations to build their technical
capacity to assess conflict situations for instances
of trafficking in persons". (S/PRST/2015/25).

In the post-conflict context, we should be able to
better protect, assist and support victims. In a post-
conflict environment in which law enforcement and the
justice system are dysfunctional, the United Nations
should take effective measures, while respecting
national ownership and the specificities of the country
concerned, aimed at offering technical and planning
expertise in reforming security and judicial institutions.

Fifth, close cooperation between the United
Nations, subregional, regional and cross-regional
bodies and initiatives should aim at the establishment
of a global and efficient cooperation framework.

Sixth, highlighted by the Secretary-General in
his report,
"Escaping from a conflict zone or arrival at
a sought-after destination does not always shield
those fleeing conflict from becoming victims of
trafficking" (S/2016/949, para. 5).

Enhanced attention should therefore be paid to the
international protection of refugees and to addressing
the special needs of migrants in vulnerable situations.
At the same time, we need to step up international
efforts to combat the multidimensional root causes of
the current refugee and irregular migration crisis and
broader forced displacement.

Seventh, the United Nations must seize every
opportunity to contribute to conflict resolution. In order
to counter the spread and intensity of conflict, renewed
commitment to prevention and mediation is needed.
Preventive diplomacy and mediation efforts must be
stepped up across the whole United Nations system.

Today's adoption of resolution 2331 (2016), which
my country co-sponsored, and the adoption, just over a
week ago, of resolution 2322 (2016), aimed at enhancing
and fortifying judicial cooperation worldwide, are,
in our view, necessary steps towards confronting
the interrelated global challenges of terrorism and
trafficking in persons in conflict situations.

