Ms. Bangura: I wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his statement. His personal commitment
to this cause ensures that sexual violence in conflict
remain a critical concern for the entire United Nations
system, and challenges us to work in unison.
I would like to thank the Government of the United
Kingdom, especially Foreign Secretary William Hague,
for hosting this open debate on sexual violence in
conflict and for being among the leading torch-bearers
and champions for this agenda.

I also wish to thank Jane Adong Anywar for
representing the essential work undertaken by civil
society groups, which are on the front line of this battle
every day. I also thank Angelina Jolie for being here
today and standing in solidarity. Her voice is a light in
the darkness for many survivors.

Twenty years ago, the United Nations provided
irrefutable evidence that the widespread and
systematic rape of women, girls and men was being
perpetrated in the countries of the former Yugoslavia.
That led to unprecedented advances in international
jurisprudence - the recognition of rape as a war
crime and crime against humanity by the International
Criminal Tribunals established for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

Two weeks ago, I Visited Bosnia and Herzegovina,
where an estimated 50,000 women were targeted with
rape and other forms of sexual violence during four years
of conflict. But 20 years after peace was re-established,
impunity for those crimes still reigns. There have been
only a handful of prosecutions. While the perpetrators
have enjoyed the fruits of peace and have been free to
rebuild their lives, their victims continue to work in the
shadows and in shame, unable to lay the past to rest and
to move forward.

In their day-to-day lives, survivors of sexual
violence are forced to face the men who raped
them - in banks, in supermarkets and at the schools
of their children, children whose "inheritance" is the
stigma of sexual violence, many of whom are offspring
born of rape. Those women told me that they could
look forward to the future when that future continued
to be determined by many of the very people who had
destroyed their lives.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the guns may have
fallen silent 20 years ago, but for the survivors of sexual
Violence the war has not ended. Their battle continues as
they struggle with physical and psychological injuries,
stigma and isolation, poverty and destitution. That is
what I have witnessed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
in many other countries devastated by war. Conflict-
related sexual violence, when left unaddressed by

justice and reparations, can have a profound impact
on the sustainability of peace and the prospects for
developments.
That is why the theme oftoday's debate - combating
impunity for sexual violence - is of the utmost
relevance and urgency. By focusing on impunity, we
make a more concerted effort to put the spotlight on the
perpetrators, that is, on those who commit, or command,
or condone sexual violence in conflicts. In so doing, we
begin to re-direct the stigma and the consequences of
sexual violence from the survivors to the perpetrators.

Over the course of five years, we have seen
significant progress at the political level, advances led
largely by the Security Council. Its engagement has
shattered an enduring myth that has paralysed action
for too long, namely, that sexual violence is culturally or
socially unspeakable, that it is an inevitable by-product
of war for which little can be done, or that it does not
merit such singular focus because in the hierarchy of
human rights violations sexual violence is a lesser evil.

To the contrary, the resolutions of the Security
Council affirm that this crime, when committed
systematically and used as a tool ofwar, is a fundamental
threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security, and as such requires an operational, security
and justice response. That paradigm shift requires a
new approach to attack the scourge of war-time rape.
Among other things, it compels us to expand the circle
of stakeholders beyond the traditional gender experts,
to also engage uniformed peacekeepers, mediators,
ceasefire monitors, war-crime prosecutors and the full
range of civilian-protection and justice-sector actors.

The draft resolution to be adopted by the Council
today consolidates that approach. It reinforces the
robust conceptual framework, the infrastructure and
the elements of the compliance regime established
by resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960
(2010) - a compliance regime based on reliable and
timely information and analysis, and the political,
strategic and tactical-level actions that must be taken on
the basis of such information. In its scope, operational
detail and clarity, the draft resolution encapsulates
the evolution of our understanding of conflict-related
sexual violence and what it takes to prevent it. As such
it, outlines a comprehensive operational approach to
tackle the problem.

The draft resolution places emphasis on a more
consistent and rigorous investigation and prosecution of
sexual violence crimes as a central aspect of deterrence
and, ultimately, prevention. Essentially, we must raise
the cost and consequences for those who commit
such crimes. The draft resolution also stresses that
considerations of sexual violence must be explicitly and
consistently reflected in peace processes, ceasefires and
peace agreements. That gives fundamental recognition
to the principle that there can be no viable peace and
security when the security of women is not at the heart
of peacemaking.

The draft resolution emphasizes that sexual
violence must be specifically reflected in other critical
peace and security processes and arrangements, such as
security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes. That includes ensuring
that those who commit, command or condone sexual
violence be vetted and excluded from positions of
influence and power.

The draft resolution emphasizes the need for
comprehensive and multidimensional strategies for
us to meet our obligations to the survivors of sexual
violence - the critical health, psychosocial, legal and
other interventions that they must have to rebuild their
lives.

Crucially, the draft resolution calls on all parties
to a conflict to make specific commitments to prevent
sexual violence, and challenges the United Nations to
engage with parties to illicit such commitments. Such
an engagement-based approach has already begun to
yield results, with several formal agreements between
the United Nations and affected countries to address
conflict-related sexual violence.

The United Nations Team of Experts plays an
important role in that regard, serving as a ready resource
for national authorities in their efforts to strengthen the
rule-of-law response to sexual violence. That is proving
to be an innovative and valuable tool for Governments,
and should be further reinforced. In the coming
months, we also hope to accelerate the deployment
of women's protection advisers to the relevant United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions.
The women's protection advisers are a new cadre of
specialists combining political and security expertise,
human rights monitoring and gender analysis. Their
principal role is to catalyse the implementation of the
key operational aspects of the Council's resolutions on
sexual violence in conflict.

Since taking office, in September 2012, I have
placed particular emphasis on engaging national
stakeholders in order to foster national ownership,
leadership and responsibility. My experience to date
reinforces my belief that it is at the country level
that will and resolve are most urgently required to
implement national legislation, strengthen institutions
for the prosecution of crimes of sexual violence and to
enhance capacity to care for survivors.

I cannot overemphasize that the commitment of
the United Nations system, however great it may be,
can never substitute for the political will and action
of national actors. The United Nations, through the
United Nations Action Network of 13 entities, stands
ready to support local efforts. But national actors must
lead from the front, and the international community
must support their efforts with adequate resources and
technical assistance.

Today it is still largely cost-free to rape a woman,
child or man in conflict. Sexual violence has been used
throughout the ages precisely because it is such a cheap
and devastating weapon. But for the first time in history,
we can reverse that reality. It will require leadership
and political courage, and a relentless determination
to match the cold, calculating brutality of those who
would rape the innocent for military or political gain.

I believe that we have the collective will, and
increasingly the tools, to make it an unsustainable
liability for parties to use sexual violence as a weapon
of war. The resolve of the Council and the international
community as a whole has set us firmly on the path of
accountability and prevention. We must stay the course
until we achieve the critical mass of action that will
turn the tide on history's oldest and least condemned
crime.

