Mr. Fiillemann (International Committee of the Red Cross): I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving the opportunity to the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to address the
Security Council today.

The ICRC, as an independent and neutral
humanitarian organization that is independent from the
United Nations, recognizes the importance of the
Security Council's efforts to address the situation of
women in the context of peace and security.

Women and girls are frequently placed at the
epicentre of conflicts, endangered not only because of
their proximity to the fighting, but also because they
are deliberately being targeted, as a method of warfare.
Since the adoption, 10 years ago, of resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security, women's issues
have been very much at the forefront of the
international agenda.

For its part, the ICRC decided some 10 years ago
to emphasize, across all its programmes and
operational activities, the particular respect and
protection accorded to women and girls by
international humanitarian law. Women separated from
their family are often left without financial and
emotional support. Displaced women, having been
forced to flee their home, may have to assume extra
responsibilities and find themselves at greater risk of
sexual violence and abuse. Moreover, their access to
safe drinking water, food or health care is often
hampered.

To strengthen its response in promoting the
protection of women, the ICRC has developed a
multidimensional approach to identify and address the
specific vulnerabilities of women and girls in armed
conflict and other situations of violence. This approach
recognizes, first and foremost, that women are not
totally vulnerable and display remarkable strength and
courage in wartime, often finding ingenious ways of
coping with the difficulties they face.

When considering the needs of women during
conflict, prevention is essential. While it is imperative
that the international community react to sexual
violence as to any other crime, it is also essential that
Member States resolutely engage in preventing sexual
violence. Through the promotion of international
humanitarian law, the ICRC presses all parties to an
armed conflict to respect the categorical prohibition of
all forms of violence against women.

Activities in the communities are often carried
out together with local Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, especially activities aimed at breaking the
taboos surrounding this issue and sensitizing local
communities so that survivors of sexual violence are
not stigmatized.

Through instruction and training programmes on
international humanitarian law for armed forces and
armed groups, the ICRC emphasizes the prohibition of
rape and other forms of sexual violence and advocates
its inclusion in the internal regulations and manuals of
armed forces and groups.

The ICRC strongly encourages Member States to
include in their national legislation provisions to
ensure better respect for women and girls at all times,
particularly in times of war and other situations of
violence. Such measures have an impact on both
prevention and accountability.

The key message of the ICRC today is simple:
the existing rules of international humanitarian law
must be respected. Where they are not, those
responsible for violations must be held to account. The
ICRC welcomes the importance the Security Council
attaches to full respect for international humanitarian
law. Indeed, better respect for the existing rules of
international humanitarian law would ensure much
better protection for women and girls in armed conflict
and other situations of violence.
To conclude, the ICRC reiterates its commitment
to the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000), and, more
importantly, the ICRC will continue to promote, in its
own work, the respect that international humanitarian
law guarantees for women and girls.

