Mr. Szijjarto (Hungary): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address this
respected audience.

I would first like to underline that Hungary is
committed to gender equality, to promoting the social
and political position of women and to implementing
the women and peace and security agenda as well as
resolution 1325 (2000). Sexual Violence against women
in conflict is an important issue for and in Hungary.
It is also a sensitive issue because my grandparents'
generation had first-hand experience in that regard
during the Second World War - we do not want to see
those times repeated. That is why we consider resolution
1820 (2008) as a milestone resolution that considers
sexual violence to be an obstacle to maintaining
international peace and security.

We believe that it is absolutely unacceptable and
outrageous that according to UNICEF's annual report of
2017, there are still more than 15 million girls between
the ages of 15 and 19 who are victims of sexual violence.
I would also like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons 2018 of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, which states that 71 per cent of the victims
of human traffickers are women and girls and that three
quarters of them are kidnapped for sexual exploitation.

I would like to ask the Council to consider the
establishment of a solid legal framework to be able
to address the issue of sexual violence in conflict
situations. I truly believe that the fight against the
impunity of those who have committed such crimes is
a common responsibility of the United Nations and its
States Members. We believe that if there is impunity for
those who commit such terrible crimes, that may serve
as encouragement for further terrible crimes, which
we must definitely prevent and avoid. That is why we
believe that there is a necessity to involve more and
more experts in international monitoring committees,
United Nations fact-finding missions and the sanctions
committees of the Security Council.

I would like to inform the Council that Hungary
has been elected to the Executive Board of UN-
Women. After having signed a donor agreement, we
paid $100,000 to the United Nations Trust Fund to End
Violence against Women. Last but not least, I would
like to inform the Council that we are considering the
establishment of a national action plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and we have already begun to
prepare the guidelines attached to the women and peace
and security agenda.

We will support Ms. Nadia Murad's initiative to
help the survivors of massacres and sexual violence.
We have already helped communities living in Iraq and
the neighbourhood to be able to stay there or return to
the places from which they previously had to escape.

