Mrs. Hrda (Czech Republic): Let me thank the
Azerbaijan presidency of the Security Council for
scheduling this important debate and the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2013/525), as well as today's
briefers for their updates.

We highly welcome the adoption today of resolution
2122 (2013) and align ourselves with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union.

The protection of human rights, including the rights
of women, belongs to our foreign policy priorities. The
Czech Republic takes an active stance in promoting
the strengthening and effective realization of the rights
of women and in preventing gender-based violence in
various multilateral forums. We also raise the issue
within the universal periodic review mechanism.

The Czech Republic fully endorses the relevant
rules of international criminal law regarding "rape,

sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, enforced
pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form
of sexual violence of comparable gravity". The Rome
Statute qualifies these as a war crime, both in the
context of international and non-international armed
conflicts and - when it forms part of a widespread
attack against a civilian population - as a crime
against humanity.

It is our conviction that the international community
should put particular focus on preventive efforts, namely
in the case of those violations of international law that
belong to the core crimes included under the concept of
the responsibility to protect. The rich jurisprudence of
the international criminal tribunals has recognized rape
as a powerful tool of war used to intimidate, persecute
and terrorize the enemy. The Czech Republic believes
that the effective prosecution of the perpetrators of
such crimes is an important element of lasting peace
and justice.

As part of its human rights promotion activities,
the Czech Republic takes into consideration gender
aspects and the protection of women in post-conflict
situations, as well as in countries in transition,
including by supporting projects of Czech and local
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Since 2005,
the transition promotion programme of the Czech
Ministry of Foreign Affairs - a unique financial
instrument aimed at democracy assistance - has
supported projects of civil society organizations that
are working to strengthen democracy, the rule of law
and respect for human rights by empowering civil
society, including women's organizations, throughout
the world.

For example, a recent project has been implemented
by the Czech NGO ADRA - which deals with the
capacity-building of civil society in the protection of
women's rights - in Georgia. Its aim is to achieve the
highest standard of protection in the context of providing
services to victims of domestic violence. Through the
project, the Czech Republic has shared its experience
with its Georgian partners, particularly concerning the
legal counseling to victims of domestic violence and,
importantly, in the broader context of assistance.

The Czech Republic also provides long-term
support to women Victims of sexual Violence in the
eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The support - amounting to over 32 million
Czech koruny today - ranges from providing first
aid and comprehensive medical, psychological and
legal assistance, to providing shelter and livelihood
support for women and their unwanted children who
have been excluded from local society, as well as
organizing awareness campaigns for medical personnel
and the public in the affected areas. Awareness-raising
aimed at the public sphere, as well as the judiciary, is
a key prerequisite in ensuring effective protection of
the rights of women in countries in transition or post-
conflict situations.

