Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to join previous speakers in
expressing our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
taking up this very important item for the open debate
of the Security Council for the month of October.

The year 2000 marked an important milestone in
the advancement of women's participation in the
peacebuilding process with the adoption of the
landmark resolution on women and peace and security.
It was eight years ago that resolution 1325 (2000) was
created to give a voice to countless women who would
otherwise remain silent or go unheard during the
international community's long journey towards
peaceful prosperity. As the first to recognize the vital
role that women play in the cultivation of peace and
security, the resolution also highlighted the need for
concrete action. Now, as we assess our progress, we are
both encouraged by the achievements and compelled to
address inadequacies in the resolution's implementation.

Despite clear progress, countless women continue
to suffer from inequities that stem from peacebuilding
procedures that have not yet benefited from the ideals
of gender mainstreaming. Far too many women find
themselves passively swept along by the peace process
rather than being active participants in dialogue and
policymaking.

Ultimately, no sustainable peace can be achieved
without giving women ownership of their own security
advancement. The full participation of women in field-
based peacekeeping operations will contribute to
considerable progress towards the goal of gender
mainstreaming. The reality is that there is still a lack of
women's participation throughout the peace process,
from formal negotiations to field-based situations. One
way to address the issue is to empower member states
by providing a clear framework for the nomination
protocol of women for systematic participation,
including in high-level positions.

The presence of women throughout the peace
process hierarchy will ensure that vital gender issues
are integrated and dealt with at multiple stages of

peacekeeping and security. Reaching beyond the
individual Member States, women's full participation
in the peace process must be actively supported by the
United Nations system and built into its policymaking
procedures.

As to further efforts to be made by the United
Nations system, the first has to be ensuring the
adequate representation of women among the highest
levels of United Nations peacekeeping leadership.
Their absence is felt most strongly in the crucial
policymaking fields where United Nations agendas that
directly affect women are formed without the full
contribution of the female voice.

In that regard, we welcome the recent
appointments of female senior officials by the
Secretary-General in the Department of Field Support
and in peacekeeping field missions, such as the Under
Secretary-General for Field Support, the Special
Representative for United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) and the Deputy Special Representatives for
UNMIL, the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, the
United Nations Observer Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad. We would
like to encourage the United Nations system to have
more female leadership representation both at
Headquarters and at the field level.

Secondly, the Security Council should devote
special attention to any peacekeeping proposal in order
to ensure that it does not fail to integrate women and
gender components into the heart of its protocol. The
Security Council may also consider the creation of a
separate procedural body dedicated to the incorporation
of gender components into the development of peace
and security to ensure that women's participation in the
peacebuilding process becomes a standardized issue.

There is also an urgent need to enhance the
Department of Political Affairs through adequate
human resources, which play a key role in peace
negotiations and in ensuring women's engagement. Our
final point on the United Nations system is the creation
of a stronger gender entity that is fully equipped to be
an effective mechanism supporting the implementation
of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). We look
forward to taking concrete action to that end during the
current session of the General Assembly.

Our discussion is focused on full participation by
women in the peace process as engaged actors.
However, we cannot help but be reminded of the tragic
situation of women victims in conflict. In particular,
violence against women in post-conflict situations
must become a thing of the past. Sanctions should be
aimed directly at perpetrators, and any tolerance of
impunity should be ended. In that vein, the recent
resolution 1820 (2008) should be implemented in an
effective and substantive way.

My delegation would like to express its
commitment to achieving concrete results in the pursuit
of women's active participation in international peace
and security. Ultimately, women are the engine that
drives a nation's peace and security forward. It is our
hope that open dialogues such as this, and subsequent
concrete actions based on our deliberations, will
continue to advance the crucial role of women in the
peacebuilding process.

