Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like first to thank
you, Madam President, and your team for chosing the
important issue of displaced women and girls for the
subject of today's debate. Let me also commend all the
briefers, who contributed so significantly to our debate
today.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
present a few remarks from our national perspective.

We remain deeply concerned about the spread
of conflicts, which has made refugee and forced
displacement figures soar to levels not recorded since
the Second World War. It is worrisome that, according
to estimates of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 86 per cent
of refugees are from the developing world. We fully
agree with the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/693)
that effective responses to the threats affecting women
and girls in conflict settings must include mobilizing
attention and resources on prevention, mitigation and
the strengthening of national infrastructure for peace.
Building on good practices that have delivered results,
often in cooperation with civil society, helps to tackle
risks and obstacles.

Consistent with the Peacebuilding Commission's
declaration on women's economic empowerment
for peacebuilding, we also reaffirm the significance
of concerted efforts in carrying out peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction. It is important to
recognize that women's economic empowerment creates
conditions for their political and social leadership and
for counteracting inequalities and discrimination.

For the last two years Poland has been an active
partner in implementing programmes and projects
supporting women's and girls' economic needs in
Nigeria, the Sudan, Zambia and Kenya, as well as in
Palestine, Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Georgia, Bolivia
and Cuba. Since 2012 we have continued our assistance
to the Syrian people by channelling resources via
the UNHCR field office that takes care of Syrian
refugees in Lebanon and by the implementation of
non-governmental organization projects for Syrian
refugees in Jordan and Lebanon.

In Poland we have introduced improved asylum
procedures. Polish national authorities exercise the
UNHCR's recommendations on the suspension of return
regarding foreigners coming from countries affected by
conflicts. Specific health services are being provided
in the process of granting protection to female asylum-
seekers. If a medical or psychological examination
confirms that a woman has been subjected to violence,
her hearing is held in the presence of a psychologist or
doctor.

We have welcomed the recent launch of a global
study to review the progress achieved and challenges
remaining since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). By mid-2015 we hope to receive guidance not
only on how to translate good practices into standard
practices, but also how to utilize synergies between the
commitments and priorities set by the United Nations
within agendas dealing with issues ofwomen and peace
and security. Such advice would be extremely useful
in the context of current global security challenges,
including the escalation of terrorist and extremist
threats.

Finally, mindful of the dramatic situation of
female survivors from conflict-affected areas and the
rising demand on humanitarian assistance, we call
on the Security Council to use its mandate to pursue
accountability for any substantiated case of misconduct,
including sexual exploitation and abuse.

