Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to express my gratitude
to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2013/525), which we read and followed
attentively. We wish Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka success in
her new post as Executive Director of UN Women.

I also would like to congratulate Azerbaijan on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of October. We wish its delegation every success.

My country, Syria, has long been among the fairest
countries in the Arab and Islamic world in securing all
the necessary provisions and environment for enabling
women to enjoy equal rights with men, free from
the ignorance, blindness and social and intellectual
shortcomings that prevail elsewhere. A woman serves
as a Vice-President in my country at a time when other
countries ban women from driving cars.

Regrettably, the current crisis in Syria has evoked
a strange and inhumane phenomenon that runs contrary
to the values of the Syrian people and all the legal
instruments that Syria has signed and acceded to in
its efforts to support the rights of women and children.
The current situation runs contrary to the principles
of the Islamic religion and Arab chivalry. That change
came about with the arrival of mercenaries and takfiris
who are openly recruited from all parts of the world to
impose unjust Wahhabi ideas that degrade women and
turn them into concubines.

All this has taken place with arming, support and
financing from Qatar, Saudi Arabia and France. Those
States have spent countless sums on influential media
and invidious sectarian incitement to halt Syria's
socioeconomic, security and judicial development.
They work to undermine its independence, its national
decision-making and its rejection of those who exploit
religion. Most prominent among the fatwas that affect
women is the fatwa of sex as struggle, which allows
fornication under the guise ofjihad. Published by some
irresponsible minds and financed by the Gulf regimes,
the fatwa encourages Islamic women to commit
adultery in the name of religion. My delegation has
sent a detailed letter on that diseased fatwa and the
mentalities that promote it to the Secretary-General
(A/68/487, annex). We urge all those present and those
who are concerned for human rights to study it.

The Syrian authorities are eager to bring to
justice all those who commit such crimes, and we
are documenting those grave Violations. Syria arrests
the perpetrators and subjects them to accountability
under Syrian national law. On the other hand, we must
work together to remove the root causes of crimes
against women and girls and to combat impunity by
immediately putting pressure on the regimes that seek
to promote terrorism in Syria to halt their financial
support and the provision of arms, as well as to end the
media coverage they give to terrorist groups that violate
women's basic rights. We call for the accountability of
the regimes of both Qatar and Saudi Arabia for their
support for and the media coverage they provide to the
crazy, irresponsible minds that encourage the rape of
innocent Syrian women.

We cannot but express our deep concern about the
deterioration of the situation in the refugee camps of
our Syrian brothers, where Syrian women and girls face
insecurity and are being trafficked, raped and subjected
to forced marriage, all of which has been documented
in international reports. Although slow and delayed,
Western media reports, most recently that of Germany's
RTL television, have documented the tragedy of Syrian
refugees younger than 14 who have ended up in slave
markets, where petrodollars turn them into concubines
in the name of religion. Those who exploit the tragedy
of the Syrian refugees do so deliberately in order to
create a ghetto of Syrian victims and exploit them in a
manner that degrades Syria and its people.

Syria has notified all the specialized organs of the
United Nations system, especially the Security Council
and the General Assembly, through a number of official
communications and reports. Regrettably, the United
Nations remains less engaged than expected, despite
the important role it could play to achieve justice, to
hold perpetrators accountable and to put an end to such
an inhuman and immoral phenomenon.

We hope that Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngucuka
will actively seek to put an end to that phenomenon
and that she will pressure those foreign Powers that
seek to intensify the bloodshed in Syria to cease
their interference in my country and their violations
of international law and the United Nations charter.
We also look forward to her active participation in
protecting the rights of Syrian women under the Israeli
occupation in the occupied Golan Heights and in
improving their living conditions.

The permanent representative of France spoke
about my country in a manner that lacks the diplomatic
finesse expected from the representative of a permanent
member of the Council. It would seem that the French
regime - through its extremism and its continued
disregard for its responsibilities as a permanent member
of the Council, along with its bloody interference in
the affairs of several member States, including my
country - has lost the legitimacy to maintain its status
in the Council. By encouraging, arming and protecting
regimes that refuse to attend the Geneva conference and
that continue to kill Syrians from Paris and elsewhere,
the French regime, through its irresponsible and childish
interference, has become a threat to international peace
and security and is no longer a member to be trusted
with maintaining international peace and security.

