Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia is appalled by
the continuing use of violence against women and
girls, including sexual violence in conflict and the
targeting of women and girls by extremist groups. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2016/822) is clear that,
despite progress made on the women and peace and
security agenda, there remain many gaps that require
immediate action.

Human rights violations against women and girls
have continued unabated. The international community
must do everything it can to stop that trend. That is why
Australia has provided $6 million to the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence
against Women and is researching the role women
play in combatting extremism so that we can better
understand how to tap into the valuable experiences of
women to strengthen our approaches.

By harnessing the expertise of civil society
organizations on the ground we can be more effective
in our efforts to remove barriers and create meaningful
opportunities for women to engage equally in all stages
of peace processes. Civil society groups represent
those whose lived experience is most relevant. In most
instances, they existed before the conflict and they
will exist after it. That is why Australia, working with
partners, established the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women and Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action (GAI). The GAI helps women's civil society
organizations to contribute to conflict prevention,
crisis response, and peacebuilding. We encourage other
Member States to support that practical mechanism.

At last year's high-level review (see S/PV.7533),
Australia reaffirmed its commitment and set out its
actions to progress the agenda on women and peace and
security. In that vein, Australia last week announced
further humanitarian and stabilization assistance
for Iraq following commencement of the operation
to retake the city of Mosul. That assistance includes
particular support to the women and girls of Mosul for
reproductive and sexual health. In addition, Australia
recently committed $220 million in response to the
Syria crisis, including dedicated components to address
the unique needs of women and girls.

Australia reiterates its support for increasing the
participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, particularly in staff officer and military
observer roles, as outlined in the London communique
of the United Nations peacekeeping defence
ministerial meeting.

I cannot conclude without again voicing our
deep concern about sexual exploitation and abuse
by peacekeepers. We welcome initiatives aimed at
prevention, survivor assistance and accountability,
and stress again that there is no excuse for these
actions, nor excuse for inaction in addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse. We know that to sustain peace
we must include women; not just in our words, but in
our actions. And we must accelerate and strengthen
practical efforts to place women front and centre in the
peace and security agenda.

