Ms. Boiko (Ukraine): I would like to begin by
commending you, Madam President, for convening this
debate. It allows Member States to reaffirm their
commitment to implementing Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), to assess progress, exchange
views and develop new approaches to such an
important issue. Our appreciation also goes to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Executive Director of UN-Women, to the
President of the Economic and Social Council and to
the representative of the NGO Working Group for their
thoughtful insights into today's topic.

While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement by
the delegation of the European Union, I will make few
brief points in my national capacity.

The eleventh anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) is an opportunity to strengthen the global
agenda on women and peace and security. We welcome
the latest report of the Secretary-General on this issue
(S/201l/598*) and take positive note of its
recommendations. My country remains fully
committed to the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000), 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009).
Ukraine considers that ensuring gender equality,
gender mainstreaming and the empowerment of women
is not only an important objective, but is also an
essential part of the pursuit of democracy and
development. This year's awarding of the Nobel Peace
Prize to three distinguished and inspirational women is
an acknowledgement of the crucial role of women as
defenders of human rights and contributors to political
settlements, conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. In recognition of the essential
contribution of women towards achieving those
objectives, Ukraine co-sponsored a draft resolution on
women and political participation.

Despite all international efforts, women and girls
continue to be the most vulnerable victims of armed
conflicts, targeted with sexual violence, sexual
exploitation and other forms of gender-based violence.
Eliminating impunity is critical for preventing gender-
based crimes. In 2010 Ukraine became a co-sponsor of
Council resolution 1960 (2010), which concerned
sexual violence in armed conflict. We remain ready to
undertake further steps, in particular as a member of
UN-Women.

Ukraine recognizes the instrumental role that a
stronger United Nations gender architecture could play
in advancing women's rights. It is a great responsibility
for my country to be represented on the Executive
Board of UN-Women. Ukraine's activity in this entity
is focused on implementing policies and practices that
seek to reduce gender inequality in all its
manifestations in every sphere of life, including
decision-making and leadership, the elimination of
violence against women and girls, and trafficking in
women and girls.

We welcome the Council's efforts to pay special
attention to the concrete needs of women and girls
affected by armed conflicts in such spheres as health,
education, legal support, and water and sanitation.

The focus of today's debate on the participation
and role of women in conflict prevention and
mediation could not be more timely. Ukraine has
always stressed the need for the widest possible use of
the potential of women in the spheres of preventive
diplomacy, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We
believe that there is still much to be done to redress the
current underrepresentation of women in decision-
making with regard to conflict resolution so as to make
their voice heard loud and clear in peace negotiations.
11-57075

In that context, we welcome the adoption of the
first-ever resolution on "Strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution" (General Assembly resolution 65/283). In that document, all Member
States resolved to promote the equal, full and effective
participation of women at all levels of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as to provide adequate gender
expertise for all mediators and their teams.

My delegation prides itself on the long record of
participation of Ukrainian women, as civilian police
and military observers, in United Nations peacekeeping
efforts. Currently, they are deployed in five United
Nations peacekeeping operations - in Cote d'Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, South
Sudan and Timor-Leste. Their dedicated service to
peace is one of the concrete ways in which Ukraine
contributes to advancing the agenda of today's meeting
on the ground.

The importance of women's participation in
peacebuilding can hardly be overestimated. The issue
is one of the priorities of Ukraine as a member of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and one of it current Vice-Chairs.
We see a great deal of merit in strengthening
collaboration between the PBC and UN-Women in this
field. From that perspective, Ukraine was one of the
initiators of the first-ever joint high-level meeting of
those bodies aimed at promoting advocacy for
women's participation in peacebuilding, in line with
the Secretary-General's thematic report.

In conclusion, Ukraine calls on Member States to
renew their commitments under resolution 1325 (2000)
and to launch new strategies to address gender equality
issues in peace and security processes. Ukraine is
resolved to do its share.

