Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you very much, Madam President, for this excellent
initiative of holding this debate on women and peace
and security.

(spoke in English)

We commend the excellent work of the Under-
Secretary-General and Executive Director of
UN-Women, Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, and all the
participants in today's debate. We welcome the key
role that UN-Women has been playing in empowering
women and eliminating violence against women and
girls through various activities and instruments.

While aligning ourselves with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union, I wish to make
few additional points in my national capacity.

Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, adopted almost 14 years ago, underlines
the importance of the equal participation of women
and their full involvement in efforts to maintain and
promote peace and security. Despite many endeavours
and achievements, not all commitments have been
satisfactorily met or implemented. Armed conflict
affects women harder than men. They are often deprived
of their rights and are subject to violence. Violence
against women constitutes not only human rights abuse,
it is increasingly becoming a security issue. Targeting
civilians, women and children is an extremely abhorrent
act that must be punished accordingly.

Women's role in peace and security is indispensable.
Yet peace processes mostly remain the domain of men.
The number of women involved in peace and security,
including in decision-making, remains very low. On
the other hand, it is commonly recognized that the
participation of women in security forces increases the
effectiveness, credibility and the legitimacy of those
institutions. One of the main obstacles to increased
female participation in United Nations peacekeeping
missions remains their underrepresentation in national
armed forces and police services, in particular at senior
levels and in operational roles. In that regard, we must
all strengthen our efforts to increase the engagement
and advancement of women in the security sector and
its personnel.

Efficient, professional and accountable security

forces are indispensable for protecting the basic safety
of citizens, including women and girls. In that respect,
Slovakia considers security sector reform to be a crucial
instrument in transforming a security apparatus into a
professional, transparent and accountable institution
that is able to prevent, eliminate, investigate and punish
sexual violence in armed conflicts. That is why we call
for the effective implementation of resolution 2151
(2014), on security sector reform. Among other things,
the resolution underscores the importance of the equal
and effective participation and full involvement of
women in all stages of the security sector reform. It
also underlines the vital role of women in prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and in strengthening
civilian protection measures in the security services
during the reconstruction process. It also suggests
including more women in training for security
personnel, and calls for effective vetting processes in
order to exclude perpetrators of sexual violence from
the security sector.

Slovakia supports the full implementation of
the United Nations Security Sector Reform Integrated
Technical Guidance Notes, officially launched in
December 2012. The guidance notes are focused,
inter alia, on the inclusion of women's perspectives in
security sector reform to ensure that United Nations-
supported initiatives in that area respond to the
different needs and capacities ofwomen, girls, men and
boys endangered by sexual violence.

The situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons is a persistent challenge. Today, we face too
many cases in too many regions where, due to various
reasons, the armed forces and police are simply not
able to provide basic security for citizens, including
women and girls. That results in many cases in their
forced exodus and the inevitable loss of their families
and homes. Women should be highly represented in the
security units of refugee camps and in decision-making
and security positions, including police boards, security
sector institutions and oversight bodies.

Ending impunity for crimes committed against
displaced people, in particular women and girls, is a key
priority. Greater support for justice reform initiatives
is needed. That includes legislative development,
specialized judicial training and building equal
and timely access to justice. Initiating legal rights,
awareness-raising and providing free or affordable
legal services can improve access to justice for all who
need it due to any kind of abuse, including gender-
based abuse.

We fully support the commitment of the Secretary-
General to the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel.
The numbers of substantiated allegations, despite the
downward trend, still give us a cause for concern.
Additional efforts are required to shorten the time
needed to complete investigations and to ensure that
investigations address allegations comprehensively.

Last but not least, we should not forget about the
role and protection of women-led society groups, which
play an important role in combating violent extremism
in many countries. It is therefore essential to involve
women's groups and female experts in decision-making
in national, regional and international counter-
terrorism initiatives. Ensuring the safety and protection
of women human rights defenders, such as Nobel Peace
Prize winner Malala Yousafzai, needs to be prioritized
by Member States and their security sector institutions.

To sum up, in many documents we have addressed
many elements in terms of how to improve the situation.
Let me mention six of them. First, with regard to the
protection of women's rights, women and children are
the main victims of rights violations in situations of
violence and conflict. Secondly, on participation, we
must encourage women to move into the public sphere
and the security sector, to come forward and speak and to
be active. Thirdly, with regard to inclusivity, resolution
1325 (2000) cannot be implemented without gender
inclusivity in security sector reform, demobilization
and reintegration. Fourthly, there must be transparency
and accountability. Fifthly, justice and healing are
critical issues for women. Impunity for crimes must not
be allowed for anyone. The last element is financing
gender equality. Resources and financing mechanisms
should be considered for the increased participation of
women in peace and security.

No women, no peace is affirmed by many practical
examples. Many conflicts could have been prevented if
women had been involved at the early stage. The year
2015 will mark our common endeavours to advance
the agenda of women and peace and security with the
adoption of the post-2015 sustainable development
goals, as well as the fifteenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) and the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. Let us therefore
work together to mark those important benchmarks
with concrete actions.

