Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to congratulate Peru on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank Peru for organizing this open
debate and to wish it every success, and the delegation
of the Netherlands for its successful presidency of the
Security Council last month.

I would also like to express my sincere thanks
to Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for the important role that she and her team play in
helping and empowering the female survivors of sexual
violence and the victims of indiscriminate terrorism.
We also thank Ms. Razia Sultana for her briefing
and for the valuable information that she provided on
the Rohingya.

Iraq continues to suffer some of the most dreadful
terrorist organizations, which have committed heinous
crimes against innocent people. These gangs have
abducted thousands of citizens, including children and
women whom they have enslaved and trafficked. Many
have been raped and exposed to some of the worst and
most humiliating and inhumane treatment ever.

Based on our responsibility to provide protection
and accountability and to prosecute the perpetrators
of such terrible crimes against the people of Iraq,
we have adopted a number of practical measures,
the most important of which was the signing of the
joint communique between the Iraqi Government,
represented by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict on 23 September 2016. That
represented the beginning of a joint effort of Iraq and
the United Nations to address the sexual violence and
brutality committed by the terrorist Da'esh organization
and to address some of the challenges faced by Iraq in
ensuring accountability for such crimes and bringing
the perpetrators to justice in line with the relevant
Iraqi laws.

Pursuant to that agreement, Iraq has received
international assistance to document and gather evidence
of such crimes and strengthen the legal framework,
thereby enabling the judicial authorities to find ways
to compensate and support the survivors of rape and
children conceived as a result. In accordance with the
agreement, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and her team first visited Iraq
from 25 February to 3 March 2017. That was followed
by two more visits to Iraq by specialists from the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the most recent of which took place from 21 July to
2 August 2017. They held formal meetings with the
relevant bodies to discuss the joint plan of action
expected to be implemented under the terms of the joint
communique signed by the two parties.

That was followed by yet another important
step along the same lines. In cooperation with its
international partners, particularly the United Kingdom,
Iraq conveyed a message to the Secretary-General on
9 August 2017, requesting international assistance.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2379 (2017)
on 21 September 2017, which will help Iraq to collect,
preserve and store evidence of crimes committed in
Iraq by perpetrators and to submit that evidence to the
Iraqi judicial authorities so that they can carry out their
judicial duties, including the prosecution of crimes of
sexual violence, building judicial capacities, updating
Iraqi law and ensuring accountability for perpetrators
pertaining to Da'esh. Iraq has therefore taken an
important step towards ensuring accountability,
prosecuting the perpetrators of such crimes and treating
victims fairly.

This year, the Prime Minister of Iraq, Mr. Haider
Al Abadi, invited the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, to pay a visit to Iraq. During her
visit, the final draft of the executive plan of the joint
communique signed between Iraq and the United Nations
was put forward with a view to help in defining fields
of technical cooperation with Iraqi entities to confront
various dimensions of sexual violence in conflict. The
visit was conducted successfully from 25 February to
5 March. The Special Representative was accompanied
by Lord Ahmad, the Special Representative of the
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom on Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Minister of
State for the Commonwealth and the United Nations.
Ms. Patten met with the Prime Minister, as well as
the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Labour and
Social Affairs, the President of the Supreme Judicial
Council and religious leaders of all denominations
and other stakeholders. The executive plan of the joint
communique was launched, and a safe haven for female
survivors was also inaugurated, the first such haven in
Iraq. In this regard, the Iraqi Government commends
the constructive cooperation and important role played
by the Office of the Special Representative in assisting
Iraq, particularly during the period following the
liberation of all Iraqi cities from terrorist organizations.

Lastly, Iraq would like to thank all its partners who
contributed effectively to the eradication of terrorist
organizations, which have become a threat to all
the nations of the world. The world has realized that
everybody's interest lies in joint efforts to eradicate
such terrorist groups, wherever they are, and to
cooperate in drying up the sources of terrorism, and
in bringing terrorists to justice, thereby ensuring
victim redress and contributing to an international
envirnment that is safe for all. Iraq expects from all
of its international partners to continue providing
support for the reconstruction process, as well as for
the rehabilitation and empowerment of victims with a
view to their reintegration into society.

