Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Iwould
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN Women and the High Commissioner
for Human Rights for their statements. I would also
like to express my gratitude to Ms. Brigitte Balipou of
Femmes Africa Solidarite for having given us the views
of civil society with regard to women, the rule of law
and transitional justice in conflict situations, which is
the very pertinent topic chosen by the presidency of
Azerbaijan for our public debate today. I would also
like to assure Ms. Balipou that her call with regard to
the tragic situation in the Central African Republic has
been heard.

Luxembourg wishes to associate itself with the
statement that will be made a later by the observer of
the European Union.

Justice in times of armed conflict or in post-
conflict situations does not fundamentally differ from
justice in times of peace. The objective of justice is
always to come to a decision with regard to a wrong
committed by one individual to the detriment of
another: to ascertain its severity, to impose punishment
and, where necessary, to order reparations. However,
in specific cases of conflict or post-conflict situations,
justice often operates, but imperfectly. The victims
must overcome additional and very different obstacles
from those in peacetime. For women, those obstacles
can be truly crippling. For them, justice is often
beyond reach, whether for legal, security or social
reasons - without taking into account the fact that in
post-conflict situations the judiciary itself is often ill-
prepared to face the specific situations of women who
have suffered the violence of war.

In that context, one cannot but emphasize the
importance of transitional justice. Not only does it
allow the possibility to redress past wrongs, but it
also affords an opportunity to transform women's
situations, thereby guaranteeing lasting peace in a
more egalitarian society. The participation of women
at all levels and in a timely manner is indispensable
to guarantee that the new society that emerges from
the rubble of war will grant women their rightful place
with the full enjoyment of all their rights.

It is therefore essential that women be heard during
peace processes and that they be involved in security
sector and justice sector reforms. In a word, women
must be full-fledged stakeholders rather than just
spectators of reconstruction and peacebuilding.

Of all violations afflicting women in conflict
situations, sexual violence, which constitutes a direct
attack against physical integrity, unavoidably comes to
mind when one speaks of transitional justice and the
issue of reparations. It is indeed difficult to imagine a
society claiming to be fair and respectful of women's
rights when thousands of survivors of sexual violence
are denied their rights to see the perpetrators of that
violence brought to justice. However, in many cases,
post-conflict justice ignores the case of those women,
often because it does not possess either the necessary
expertise or the necessary resources to tackle the task.

Luxembourg backs the partnership between
the intergovernmental Justice Rapid Response and
UN Women. In cooperation with the Institute for
International Criminal Investigations, that partnership
has made it possible to establish a list of specialized
experts on the investigation of acts of sexual Violence.
In that way, experts can be rapidly deployed as
required. UN Women has already resorted to using
such experts to assist the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in numerous
commissions of inquiry. Experts have also lent
their assistance to the International Criminal Court.
Luxembourg will continue to support that initiative,
which reinforces both responsibility and the transitional
justice process.

I would add that, in the past year, we supported a
Department of Peacekeeping Operations project aimed
at bolstering the role of women in the maintenance and
building of peace, specifically by holding a regional
workshop in Liberia to provide women leaders working
for peace and security in West Africa an opportunity
to share their experiences and to strengthen their
networks.

The Security Council must play its full role in
promoting the topic of women and peace and security.
Unfortunately, there continues to be a clear gap between
principled statements and the unanimous support of the
Council for the issue of women, on the one hand, and
the concrete implementation of those statements, on the
other. We therefore support the recommendation by the
Secretary-General's in his latest report that

"when establishing and renewing [United Nations]
mission mandates, a more consistent approach with
regard to the inclusion of gender-specific provisions
could be sought." (S/2013/525, para. 73).

By adopting resolution 1325 (2000), 13 years
ago, the Security Council set itself bold objectives.
Resolution 2122 (2013), which we have just adopted
today - thanks in particular to the efforts of the United
Kingdom - allows us to make progress. It underscores
in paricular the need for the Security Council to receive
information more regularly with regard to the issue of
women and peace and security. The resolution will
bring new impetus as we near the fifteenth anniversary
of the flagship resolution 1325 (2000), which will be an
opportunity to take stock - positively one hopes - of
its implementation.

