Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to you, Madam President, for convening
today's meeting. I very much appreciate that you
yourself are presiding during lunch-time. I would also
like to thank Ms. Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Allamin for their briefings.

Last summer, when Special Representative
Bangura visited Japan, she further opened our eyes
to the importance of sexual Violence in conflict. We
look forward to her presence once again at the World
Assembly for Women to be held in Tokyo in August.

Japan welcomes the Secretary-General's report
on this agenda item (S/2015/203). It is a particularly
helpful tool for the Security Council to continuously
monitor the situation in the countries listed, so that it
can reinforce national-level policy recommendations
on each country.

Today I would like to speak briefly about two
points: first, the importance of support for the security
and judicial sectors, and, secondly, counter-measures to
violent extremist groups.

On the first point, the Japanese Government fully
supports the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General's priority objective of strengthening national
ownership, leadership and responsibility to cope with
sexual violence in conflict. In that regard, I wish to
emphasize the importance of fully involving national
military forces and the police andjudicial sectors in this
agenda. Member States should support Governments in
building capacity for those sectors.

Regarding this particular point, Japan is actively
supporting the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General's Team of Experts. For example, we are
assisting in the reinforcement ofthe judicial system and
the special police unit on women and children in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I was encouraged
by the statement made earlier by Mrs. Mabunda Lioko
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the effect
that that assistance is well appreciated and utilized.

Secondly, the measures enacted with respect
to State actors are not enough to cope with violent
extremist groups. I am shocked that the abduction of
nearly 300 girls by Boko Haram in Nigeria a year ago
today has not yet been solved. It is unacceptable that
the rise of extremist groups is continuing, such as that
ofthe Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq
and Syria.

As the Secretary-General's report points out, the
recent acts of barbarity by extremist groups shows the
use of sexual Violence as a tactic of terror in order to
achieve strategic objectives. Such extremist groups aim
to create their ideal State by controlling the community
through fear. They also use abducted women and girls
as a reward for soldier recruitment and a source of
income.

Yesterday, my Mission co-hosted a BBC film
screening and panel discussion with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
International Peace Institute and the Iraqi Mission. The
aim was to examine the current situation with respect
to sexual violence by looking at the abductions of
Yazidi women and girls by ISIL in Iraq. Yesterday's
discussion gave us the impression that the extent of the
terror that these groups instil is not fully felt. It is very
timely that Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Bangura is starting her trip to the Middle East
tomorrow; we expect positive results.

We have to analyse the objectives of these groups,
which are still on the rise, while the Security Council
needs to build a counter-strategy that recognizes the
methods that they employ and develop new counter-
measures.

Japan fully supports the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Last year,
we became the top donor to her Office, and last month
we contributed $2.5 million in additional financial
support. We are concerned that only a handful of
donors are contributing to the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We encourage
other Members to join us in providing financial support
to this important Office.

