Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I thank the
delegation and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Uganda for convening this special, emotional and very
substantive meeting of the Security Council. Look at
how many Ministers we have here today - even more
than one might have predicted or expected! I already
consider today's discussion to be a success because of
the participants, especially the high-level participants.

At the outset, I wish to express our warmest
congratulations to the Under-Secretary-General for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet. We are confident that, under
her leadership, attention to women's issues will take a
quantum leap forward.

The year 2010 marks the tenth anniversary of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which is a
landmark legal and political framework that
acknowledges the importance of making women's
participation and gender perspectives an integral part
of peace negotiations, humanitarian planning,
peacekeeping operations, post-conflict peacebuilding
and governance. The successful launch of the Open
Days on Women, Peace and Security under the
auspices of the United Nations in June 2010 in several
countries, followed by the Global Open Day on
Women, Peace and Security at United Nations
Headquarters last week, as well as numerous other
forums, events and activities, brought to light and
dramatically carried forward our many
accomplishments and the need to move forward from
the resolution to action. This is the moment for critical
assessment and for delineating a road map of action for
the way ahead.

My delegation is committed to realizing the
vision of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions adopted in support of it. We commend the
United Nations, Member States and civil society, and
particularly women themselves, for being the driving
force for the inclusion of a gender perspective in
dealing with peace and security issues and for working
as partners with the United Nations.
While individual success stories are inspiring,
women as a whole remain marginalized in round tables
on mediation, with their needs and voices remaining
unheard. UNIFEM. reports that in 24 peace processes
over the past two decades, women comprised less than
8 per cent of negotiating teams and made up only 3 per
cent of the signatories of peace agreements. These are
very small ratios, considering that women constitute
50 per cent of the world's population.

Kazakhstan fully endorses the report of the
Secretary-General on women's participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466), with its steadfast
commitment to accelerating progress toward increasing
the number of women in peace negotiations. We
wholeheartedly support his recommendation to ensure
that at least 15 per cent of United Nations funds for
peacebuilding be dedicated to projects that address the
specific needs of women and girls, advance gender
equality and empower women.

We call not just for adequate financing but also
for judicious fiscal management to ensure resources for
gender training and for supporting non-governmental
organizations and local groups. It is vital that those
groups work with us on issues of food security,
nutrition, health and HIV/AIDS, reproductive health,
education, rehabilitation, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration, as they deal with women affected by war.
It is unfortunate that, even in my part of the world,
women who carry the burden of the tragedies of
conflict continue to need special attention.

Of major concern for us is the challenge
presented by the very high incidence of sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict reconstruction phases. Of
the 300 peace agreements signed since the end of the
Cold War, only 18 of them included any mention of
sexual and gender violence. My delegation therefore
strongly supports the request made by Ms. Margot
Wallstrom, Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, to obtain additional funding for her
operational work, which would result in bridging the
gap in data collection on sexual violence in the chaos
of war and in the subsequent development of
systematic and rigorous response strategies.

Kazakhstan also welcomes the drafting of a
comprehensive set of indicators aimed at tracking
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
underscores with appreciation the intensive work of the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, Ms. Rachel
Mayanja, and her office in developing a more
methodical monitoring system and especially in
condemning rape as a tactic of terror and war.

My country has great expectations for the future
contribution of UN Women, a newly established entity
of the United Nations family, which will be able to take
the lead in revitalizing ongoing efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), bring about greater United
Nations system-wide coherence and improved
interrelatedness among key United Nations and
regional human rights instruments, especially those
focusing on women and children, which have a direct
bearing on resolution 1325 (2000).

My delegation recommends strengthening the
mandate of UN Women so that it can serve as the lead
agency in implementing efforts made pursuant to
resolutions on women and peace and security. It will
have to collaborate with agencies dealing with
humanitarian, development, human rights and aid to
development issues, as well as the defence forces of
concerned countries. It will also have to engage the
participation of women activists, war victims and other
groups, including women refugees, asylum seekers and
migrants, in order to shape programmes and services.

Kazakhstan also pays great attention to the
measures recommended by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) that seek to increase
the proportion of women sent by troop-contributing
countries and raise the number of women police
officers deployed in peacekeeping operations to 20 per
cent by 2014. My delegation endorses having DPKO
set concrete benchmarks for the participation of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities
from the highest decision-making level to field
operations on the ground and in communities, through
far-reaching campaigns to raise awareness about
women's rights.

My delegation welcomes the development of
national action plans by several Member States, as
proposed by the Secretary-General, to include women
in peace and security measures, and expresses concern
at the lack of such plans by countries most affected by
war. We urge Member States to formulate their own
plans by incorporating the best practices and lessons
learned from other countries.

To conclude, as we go forward, let us work with
determination to strengthen women's participation and
influence in conflict prevention, social justice,
coexistence and peacebuilding efforts in situations of
closed political systems and in conflict-affected States.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is structured on the three main
pillars of participation, protection and prevention, and
is a most powerful tool for women's organization,
mobilization and action.

