Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Thailand welcomes
this opportunity to discuss once again the issue of
women and peace and security. We appreciate the
comprehensive concept note (S/2014/731, annex)
prepared by Argentina, outlining key issues for today's
discussion. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his latest report (S/2014/693). Our sincere appreciation
also goes to the speakers who provided informative
briefings.

Thailand associates itself with the statements of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and of the
Human Security Network to be delivered this afternoon.

Displaced women and girls often bear the brunt of
any conflict. Their plight is often made even worse by the
risk of gender-based violence and sexual exploitation.
To address effectively the issue of displaced women
and girls requires a comprehensive strategy that
integrates security, humanitarian, development and
gender perspectives. As a country that has hosted
many hundreds of thousands of displaced persons from
neighbouring countries in the past decades, Thailand
would like to share with the Council our experience and
Views in that regard.

First and foremost, we must ensure the rights,
safety and well-being of displaced women and girls.
Against that backdrop, Thailand supports the efforts of
the United Nations to mainstream gender perspectives
into peacekeeping operations, to increase the number of
female peacekeepers and to provide training on gender
sensitivity before deployment. Thai female military
observers and police officers have served in various
United Nations missions in Darfur, in Liberia and in
Haiti. We hope that more Thai female officers can join
other United Nations missions in other parts ofthe world.
The increasing presence of female humanitarian staff
also contributes to a more secure, safer environment for
women and girls. Thailand supports the zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse committed by
United Nations personnel. It is tragic that protectors
should turn into perpetrators themselves. In the case of
such crimes, we call for a timely response, a transparent
investigation and an end to impunity.
The prevalence ofgender-based Violence in conflict
and displacement settings continues to be of grave
concern. Measures to protect displaced persons from
sexual violence are therefore crucial and need to be put
in place immediately. Thailand recently established a
legal assistance centre as well as a sexual and gender-
based violence committee in the temporary shelters
with the support of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to assist those in
distress and to educate them about their human and
legal rights.

Limited access to basic humanitarian services
adds to women and girls' vulnerability. Therefore, in
prolonged periods of displacement, we must ensure that
women and girls have access to education and health-
care services that address their specific health needs.
It is essential to provide economic opportunities for
displaced women and girls to enable them to become
more self-sufficient and less dependent. Thailand has
done that by providing them with a wide range of
vocational training and income-generating projects.

Refugees and displaced persons must also
be equipped with the necessary skills for their
voluntary return with dignity. Capacity-building
and development-oriented programmes are essential
for their self-reliance during their reintegration or
resettlement process. Through such programmes,
displaced women and girls can contribute to the
reconciliation and reconstruction of their communities,
peacebuilding and long-term development. In that
regard, Thailand would like to express its sincere
appreciation to all development partners, local and
international non-governmental organizations and civil
societies that have cooperated with our Government in
providing assistance to displaced women and girls and
to promote their empowerment. My delegation joins
previous speakers in welcoming the adoption earlier
this morning of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/2l.

Thailand is fully committed to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) and any subsequent resolutions
on this important issue. Next year will be the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
To mark the occasion, Thailand and the International
Peace Institute will undertake a joint project entitled
"Women in mediation and peace processes", focusing
on the challenges and opportunities in translating the
commitment of women and peace and security into
practice. We also hope that the high-level review of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) next year
will lend even more impetus to the comprehensive and
universal implementation of that important resolution.
