Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): We thank the
Uruguayan presidency for convening this open
debate on an issue that plagues and exacerbates many
contemporary conflicts.

At the outset, we sincerely commend Ms. Zainab
Bangura for her hard work and dedication as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict over the past few years. We
also congratulate Ms. Pramila Patten on her recent
appointment and we wish her success. I also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the
other briefers - Mr. Dieng and Ms. Jaf - for their
critical contributions and testimonies.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security.

Almost a decade has passed since the Security
Council recognized sexual violence as a tactic of war.
Despite all the efforts of the international community,
conflict-related sexual violence remains an acute issue.
It is becoming more complex, with ever-increasing
violent extremism and terrorism, displacement driven
by conflict, mass migration and human trafficking,
abduction and rape, forced marriage and pregnancy,
enslavement and the use of girls as suicide bombers.
These are not isolated crimes, but a tactic of terrorism
employed by State and non-State actors alike and aimed
at achieving strategic objectives, including financing and
recruitment, displacement, destruction and persecution.
The only way to effectively address the scourge is a
comprehensive and integrated approach that entails
prevention, early warning, justice and accountability,
the participation of women in political processes and
their political, social and economic empowerment.

We all agree that the responsibility to protect the
civilian population from gender-based and sexual
violence in conflict lies with States. To that end, having
an adequate judiciary and penal framework is essential,
as is making sure that national civilian and military
justice systems fully meet international standards. Most
conflict-affected countries, however, lack the adequate
national capacity and expertise to prevent, investigate
and prosecute sexual violence.

In that regard, we greatly value the work of the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict in providing assistance
to Governments by strengthening their capacity,
including in the areas of criminal investigation and
prosecution, military justice, legislative reform, the
protection of victims and witnesses and reparations for
survivors. We commend the partnership between the
Justice Rapid Response initiative and UN-Women. The
deployment of justice experts from their joint roster
in 50 different missions greatly contributes to ending
impunity for perpetrators.

Where action at a national level ais not yet possible,
international justice mechanisms can play a critical
role, including the International Criminal Court. The
Security Council's targeted sanctions are another
tool that could be more widely used to deter sexual
violence in conflict and to seek accountability. Sexual
and gender-based violence should be systematically
applied as designation criteria when adopting or
renewing targeted sanctions in situations of armed
conflict. Moreover, the Council should be more vocal
and systematic in its condemnation of conflict-related
sexual violence and demands for credible investigations
into all allegations of sexual violence committed in
conflict zones f for Government-affiliated forces,
armed groups or the United Nations own peacekeepers.

On the protection side, increased numbers of
women peacekeepers, the deployment of women's
protection and gender advisers, as well as human rights
and gender-awareness training, have all proved to be
successful and should be further expanded. At the
national, regional and subregional levels, cooperation
mechanisms should continue to actively promote
effective responses to conflict-related sexual crimes,
including through awareness campaigns, action plans
and cooperation frameworks, capacity-building and
shared good practices.

Care for and the protection of survivors of sexual
violence is another vital issue to address. Overcoming
trauma and restoring their dignity are crucial aspects
in stopping the vicious cycle of stigmatization and
further abuse. Victims must have access to justice,
accountability and redress mechanisms in order to
ensure their reintegration into their respective societies.

In conclusion, we have to acknowledge that violence
in conflict is rooted in violence during times of peace.
Gender inequalities, discriminatory cultural norms and
patriarchal gender stereotypes often reinforce misogyny
and crimes against women and girls. Therefore, it is
incumbent upon all Member States to redouble their
efforts to implement Sustainable Development Goal
5, on achieving gender equality and empowering all
women and girls to become actors rather than victims
in their societies, which will contribute to breaking
the cycles of violence. Making a difference requires
the full integration and mainstreaming of a gender
perspective into the Council's 4 and the whole of the
United Nations - work with coherent, consistent and
credible actions at all levels.

