The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Burundi, Canada, Colombia,
Croatia,Cyprus,theCzechRepublic,Egypt,Estonia,Fiji,
Germany, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Slovakia,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women; Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Mr. Chaloka Beyani, Special Rapporteur on the human
rights of internally displaced persons; and Ms. Suaad
Allami, of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Thomas Mayr-
Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations; Ms. Marriet Schuurman, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of NATO for
Women, Peace and Security; and Ms. Miroslava Beham,
Senior Adviser on Gender Issues of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/693, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2014/731, which contains a letter dated
10 October 2014 from the Permanent Representative
of Argentina to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.

