Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to thank all four briefers for their presentations and the
Japanese presidency for having convened this
important debate.

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union. I will therefore limit myself to a few additional
remarks.

Slovakia strongly supports the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which
represents a concrete tool for the promotion and
protection of the rights of women in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Thanks to the activities and
programmes connected with the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), there is a growing awareness
and understanding of the fact that lasting and
sustainable solutions cannot be achieved without the
participation of women and the inclusion of gender
perspectives in peace processes.

We welcome the integration of a gender-
perspective focus into the projects of various United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
active in conflict and post-conflict situations. We
attach a high value to projects promoting dialogue
between communities and the active participation of
women in ongoing decision-making processes.

In that regard, let me highlight here, for example,
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) programme on advancing women's rights to
democratic governance and peace in South-East
Europe, prepared by the UNIFEM. regional office in
Bratislava, under whose scope the agency, inter alia,
facilitates dialogue between various women's
organizations in Kosovo.

Slovakia fully supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General and of the United Nations system as
a whole to mainstream gender issues in the agenda,
especially in the field of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and the systematic
approach taken to this task through the United Nations
System-wide Action Plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as reflected in the Secretary-
General's report.

In that respect, we welcome the inclusion of the
issue of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
on the agenda of recent meetings of the Peacebuilding
Commission on Burundi and Sierra Leone.

However, despite all the efforts of the
international community, women in conflict situations
continue to face violence, including sexual violence,
and abuses. The situation of the hundreds of thousands
of women affected by conflicts and wars and the worst
abuses of human rights committed against women and
girls around the world are a reminder to us that a great
deal remains to be done to eradicate the evils of
gender-based violence. There are still too many gaps in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

In our view, a more coherent and systematic
approach on the part of the international community is
needed to address the requirements and obligations of
resolution 1325 (2000) in order to improve the
situation of women and increase their participation in
peacebuilding activities.
When the Security Council visited Darfur and
refugee camps in eastern Chad and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo last spring, we met with
women's groups, refugees and non-governmental
organizations. We heard horrific stories about gender-
based violence used as a weapon of war. United
Nations agencies in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo indicated that more than 30,000 survivors of
sexual violence have been identified in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since mid-2005, and their
number, as we have heard from Mr. Guehenno,
continues to grow alarmingly. Only some have
benefited from some form of assistance.

In western Darfur and eastern Chad, the situation
is even worse; there is almost no access by victims to
judicial and medical services. That situation, in our
view, requires urgent and effective action so as to help
and protect women from further abuses and violence.

Slovakia strongly condemns the continued
Widespread sexual violence and all other forms of
violations of the human rights of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. Impunity for such acts is
unacceptable. If the national authorities are unable or
unwilling to act, the international community has the
responsibility to use all available tools to put an end to
the impunity of the perpetrators of those crimes. We
believe that the international community and national
authorities must respond more effectively to
widespread, continued sexual violence in situations of
conflict. That response could include the prevention of
sexual violence through advocacy and sensitization
campaigns; the training of workers in the medical,
psychological and legal assistance fields and law
enforcement institutions; the identification of survivors
through community-based networks; medical,
psychological and legal assistance to victims; and
efforts to curb impunity, including by supporting the
prosecution of crimes involving sexual violence.

We also reiterate our full support for the zero-
tolerance policy with respect to crimes committed by
United Nations personnel.

We believe that the appropriate presence of
women and gender training in armed forces, including
in peacekeeping forces, clearly has a positive effect on
the behaviour and actual conduct of the troops on duty.
In this respect, we are convinced that the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000) are fully relevant for carrying
out security sector reform plans. That issue needs to be
properly addressed. It is closely related to other
phenomena that are natural parts of the comprehensive
approach to security sector reform, especially child
soldiers, gender-based violence and sexual exploitation
amongst others. Otherwise, there is an imminent
danger of countries falling back into a violent conflict.

Sustainable solutions require a holistic
institutional approach. Addressing sexual violence
requires mainstreaming the issues into security sector
and other reforms of governance and creating a
permanent mechanism that brings victims, civil society,
Government and donors together in order to coordinate
policies and actions more effectively on the domestic
and international levels.

Finally, as far as Slovakia's own implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) is concerned, the long-term
reform plan of the Slovak Armed Forces called
"Model 2015" also addresses the gender issues and
refers specifically to resolution 1325 (2000). Its
implementation has already led to a moderate increase
of the number of female officers, currently at 7.5 per
cent, in all kinds of army units, including the Slovak
troops deployed in the United Nations, North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) and European Union (EU)
missions. Women in the Slovak Armed Forces undergo
the same training as men. The predeployment training
of our peacekeepers includes special gender training
with particular emphasis on the promotion of gender
equality and the prevention of sexual crimes.

In conclusion, I would like to use this opportunity
to congratulate the Government of India on its decision
to contribute to the first-ever female Formed Police
Unit, which will join the United Nations Mission in
Liberia later this year. We believe that it will serve as a
positive example, and the presence of that unit will
have a significant positive effect on post-conflict
Liberian society.

