Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this crucial debate,
which affords the broader United Nations membership
an opportunity to contribute to the women and peace
and security agenda. I am also grateful for the concept
note that you have circulated (S/2014/ 731, annex), which
we believe will guide our deliberations to a successful
conclusion. And I wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his personal and steadfast commitment to this issue,
as well as the briefers for their insightful presentations.

We underline and insist that all forms of violence
against women are unacceptable and should in no way
be tolerated. Unfortunately, statistics show that this
phenomenon continues to be pervasive in all countries.
It is therefore necessary to intensify efforts at all levels,
particularly in terms of prevention and awareness. We
urge all Member States to strengthen their support to
women victims of violence and ensure their access to
the justice system in accordance with human rights
standards and regardless of their status.

The number of internally displaced persons and
refugees continues to rise worldwide to unprecedented
levels, and with it the increased risks faced by displaced
women and girls. Due to their vulnerability, women in
many conflict situations around the world continue to
face intolerable hardship, as they become targets of all
forms of violence.

We underline the particular vulnerability of women
and children refugees and displaced persons, including
exposure to discrimination and sexual and physical
abuse, violence and exploitation. In that regard, we
acknowledge the importance of preventing, responding
to and addressing sexual and gender-based issues.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
United Nations has adopted specific policy directives
to achieve gender equality in peacekeeping operations.
To further contriubute to that end, there is a need
to consider having the United Nations step up the
deployment of women protection advisers and gender
advisers in both peacekeeping and political missions,
as well as in humanitarian operations.

At the regional level, the African Union has made
the protection of women's right across the continent
a priority. It is committed to promoting and working
to achieve gender equality in line with the gender
policy adopted by the African Union in 2009. In that
regard, we emphasize that States have the primary
responsibility to provide protection and assistance to
refugees and internally displaced persons within their
jurisdiction, as well as to address the root causes of the
displacement problem, in appropriate cooperation with
the international community.

Since the ratification of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women in 1996, Algeria has made great efforts
to place the protection and promotion women's rights at

the centre of its national policies, strategic objectives
and programmes. The situation of women in Algeria
has experienced a very positive trend through combined
efforts by the Government and civil society.

While we reiterate Algeria's support for the
implementation of the relevant provisions of the
resolution 1325 (2000), we would like to underline that
firm political will and full commitment by Member
States on the relevant measures set out in the resolution,
which marks this year its fourteenth anniversary,
will guarantee the active participation of women in
national, regional and international institutions for
the prevention, protection and management of conflict
situations.

I am happy and proud, Madam President, that your
actions eloquently attest to your sober handling of the
work of the Security Council this month, including by
placing this issue on the Council's agenda. For me, in

our troubled world, "women , peace" and "security"
are synonimous.

