Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the Jordanian presidency for convening this important
debate on sexual violence in conflict. I also thank
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her briefing, and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, for her
statement.

My delegation endorses the statement that will be
made by the observer of the African Union.

Yesterday, 14 April, we sadly commemorated one
year of captivity of the 276 young girls kidnapped by
Boko Haram in Nigeria. Since then, hundreds of others
have been wrested from their families and communities
for purposes of sexual violence. Sexual violence, which
is characterized by rape, sexual slavery, prostitution,
and forced pregnancies and sterilization, has always
existed in all cultures of the world. In peace time, these
acts of violence often have serious consequences while
the resources to address them remain insufficient.
In contrast, in time of war or conflict, the subject
remains taboo and poorlu documented. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203), based on
information collected in 19 countries where United
Nations peacekeeping operations and country teams are
deployed, sheds light on sexual violence in two specific
cases and introduces a series of new elements that are
useful to our reflection and for response.

First of all, we note that in situations of conflict
there is a real mobilization with respect to this issue,
whose effects and impacts are of very serious concern
in the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mali, where thousands of
people, particularly women and girls, fall victim to rape
and abuse and have no access to health-care services or
justice. Sexual violence is also used by terrorist armed
groups as a tactic of war and terror, as we have seen in
Yemen, Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan and Iraq. Lastly, it results in the forced
displacement of populations in certain countries.

Furthermore, significant progress has been made
in developing standards in post-conflict situations,
including for the provision of victims' services as well
as in establishing accountability. However, as in the
specific case of Liberia, the difficulty remains that
many violations were committed by minors.

Despite the tragic and troubling nature of sexual
violence in conflict, Chad welcomes the ever-stronger
political momentum that has been built around this
issue over recent years and the determined efforts by
the international community and States aiming to create
the conditions for Victims' voices to be heard. Against
the tragic scale of the situation, States are recognizing
and meeting their obligations to prosecute those
who perpetrate such violence and to ensure Victims
protection and access to justice. These obligations also
extend to non-State actors, who, according to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203), are responsible
for more than 60 per cent of conflict-related sexual
violence. In that regard, the report lists 45 groups, by
country, credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape and other forms of
sexual violence.

Moreover, it must be underscored that sexual
violence is the result ofsocial behaviours and constitutes
a violation of human rights and humanitarian law.
Despite the fear of stigmatization and reprisals, it is
almost universal. It is therefore crucial that Victims
of sexual violence be afforded justice as a means of
contributing to international peace and security. In that
regard, Chad encourages the international community
to assist Governments to fight against impunity
by developing and implementing national plans or
strategies in line with international standards for
fighting sexual violence.

In times of conflict, ensuring the systematic
participation of women in peace processes and that
sexual violence is explicitly addressed in ceasefire and
peace agreements is one way of guaranteeing justice
for victims. In the aftermath of conflict, the integration
and participation of women in all decision-making
processes, in the public and private spheres alike,
will help eliminate negative social norms, reduce
discrimination and promote gender equality.

Since the end of the civil war in Chad, the joint
efforts of the national authorities and United Nations
agencies have sought to integrate women into the
national security forces, including the Gendarmerie
Nationale and the National and Nomadic Guard. A
quota of 30 per cent has been applied in the competitive
recruitment of police officers so as to respond to the
need to promote gender equality.

On the legal front, the President of the Republic
recently signed an order based on the law on
empowerment of the National Assembly prohibiting
early marriage so as to protect the comprehensive
development of young girls. Moreover, discussions
focused on women's empowerment were held during
national women's week in Chad and the International
Women's Day, on 8 March. On that occasion, the
Government inaugurated the first Maison de la femme
in N'dj amena.

In conclusion, let me underscore that Chad is today
host to 500,000 refugees from the Central African
Republic, the Sudan and Nigeria, and that the scourge
of sexual Violence also affects the camps where they
are housed. During the debate held under the Argentine
presidency last October (see S/PV.7289), we had an
opportunity to set out the efforts undertaken and
the progress achieved, including the establishment
of early-warning systems through women's groups
aimed at prevention and the protection of vulnerable
populations.

Finally, I would like to highlight the fate of the
219 Nigerian girls still being held by Boko Haram,
who are a daily reminder that we have not yet done
enough. Despite the strong emotions that this has
elicited through the worldwide media campaign, their
liberation becomes ever less likely. In general terms,
we need to change the mindset and our practices so as
to work together to eradicate sexual Violence for the
sake of international peace and security.

