Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Let me begin by
thanking India for convening this open debate on women
and peace and security. Lithuania aligns itself with
the statement of the European Union. My delegation
appreciates the analysis and recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2012/732,
which notes the significant progress achieved at the
normative level. We believe that the focus should
now be on implementation, which must be consistent,
coherent and comprehensive. Continuous engagement
by the Security Council on the subject is required,
because mainstreaming gender perspectives into
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and post-
conflict rehabilitation remains an unfinished business.

In that ongoing endeavour, civil society
organizations have an important role to play in
monitoring implementation, holding international
and national leaders to account, providing ideas and
feedback on what works and how it works best and giving
a voice to the most vulnerable groups. Furthermore, as
some countries are renewing their national action plans,
civil society organizations can provide useful inputs on
the best practices and lessons learned, which would be
helpful in further improving those plans.

Lithuania adopted its national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in
December 2011. One ofthe first things we did in drafting
the plan was to turn to women's non-governmental
organizations for their input. Their insights and
practical experience helped make our plan more
focused, measurable and results-oriented. Lithuania
will continue working with women's organizations,
including in developing gender awareness and gender
adviser training programmes intended for our future
peacekeeping and civilian police mission participants.

As a member of the Group of Friends of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the Group of
Friends of Mediation, Lithuania concurs with the
Secretary-General that the gender dimension of
mediation must be clearly and consistently articulated.
Women must be part of the process, as mediators and
peace negotiators, as that makes it possible to take
into account their needs for political, economic and
social empowerment. Special envoys, United Nations
mediators, peacekeeping operations, political missions
and peacebuilding support offices should regularly
consult with women's organizations on the ground
and maintain their efforts aimed at facilitating and
supporting women's equal participation as active agents
of change with full involvement in peace negotiations,
post-conflict reconstruction, electoral processes and
recovery. We call on the Security Council to make
sure that all peacekeeping missions' mandates have an
integrated gender perspective.

An important factor affecting women's greater
participation in conflict resolution and post-conflict
recovery is their safety and security. Sadly, women and
girl activists and women's rights defenders are often
subject to intimidation and violent attacks, including
sexual violence. We must step up our efforts to provide
protection for women human rights defenders and must
tackle impunity with due severity and determination.

Creating an enabling environment for women's
equal participation also requires a change in mentality
and efforts to overcome existing gender stereotypes and
prejudices. That, in turn, demands consistent efforts
to involve male local activists, traditional leaders
and, more generally, the male half of the communities
concerned, including boys.

Furthermore, it is of the utmost importance that
sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations staff
and related personnel should be fully eliminated. Such
cases constitute a double breach of women's rights
and dignity, by both local militants and warlords and
by those who are supposed to protect them on the
ground. We fully support the Secretary-General in his
call to enforce a zero-tolerance policy vis-a-vis sexual
exploitation.

My delegation would like to stress the importance
of further efforts in raising awareness of, and ensuring
consistent adherence to, the implementation of
necessary measures in the codes of conduct of States'
armed forces. Sharing best practices and encouraging
the integration of measures for the protection of women
in armed conflicts into operational documents should
be a part of our efforts.

Finally, let me also note that my delegation
supports the Secretary-General on the need to look
into the gender aspect of armed violence fuelled by the
availability, limited control and illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. In that regard, my country
looks forward to the upcoming final conference on the
arms trade treaty in March 2013 and strongly supports
calls for including a gender perspective in the future
treaty, including in connection with the need to retain
the obligation on exporting States to avoid arms being
used to commit or facilitate gender-based violence or
violence against children.
