Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago welcomes yet another opportunity to
participate in this open debate on the important topic
of women and peace and security. We also commend
the Security Council for organizing this event, which is
very symbolic in being presided over by the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations in her
capacity as President of the Council for the month of
April.

Trinidad and Tobago also expresses its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the subject (S/2014/181). We also note with
appreciation the very informative briefings prepared by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and by the representative
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security.

Trinidad and Tobago is fully committed to the goal
of gender equality. For us, the empowerment of women
is an integral part of national development as well as
an essential pillar in the maintenance of sustainable
peace. Trinidad and Tobago is strongly supportive
of the need to enhance efforts to ensure that women
are equally represented in all spheres. These include
decision-making at all levels, as well as in the field
of peace and security. We also applaud the valuable
contributions that women have made and continue
to make to conflict resolution and peacebuilding
initiatives.

As a State that seeks to fully honour its
international obligations, we recognize the importance
of resolution 1325 (2000) - a landmark resolution that
not only acknowledges the contribution of women to
international peace and security, but also addresses
women's participation in all aspects of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Trinidad and
Tobago subscribes to the rule of law as a fundamental
safeguard in the advancement and protection of the
rights of women. Consequently, we view as imperative
our continued adherence to obligations arising from a
number of international instruments that seek to protect
the rights of women and girls, including the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.

Trinidad and Tobago holds firmly to the view that
the prosecution of perpetrators of acts of violence
against women and girls during armed conflict is a
necessary requirement for lasting and durable peace.
In that regard, we remain committed to our obligations
under the Geneva Convention of 1949 and its Additional
Protocols I and II of 1977. Similarly, as a founding
member of the International Criminal Court, Trinidad
and Tobago has given domestic legal effect to the Rome
Statute, which established the Court, and encourages
others to accede to that instrument.

Trinidad and Tobago is situated in a region that
continues to experience the scourge caused by the
diversion of small arms and light weapons from legal
markets to the illicit trade, which has led to an increase in
criminal activity in the Caribbean Community. It should
be noted that women and girls are disproportionately
affected by that illicit trade. In addition, women and
girls also experience economic and psychological
burdens, abuse and sexual exploitation, which are
sometimes linked to other crimes associated with the
illegal arms trade.

Trinidad and Tobago hailed the adoption of the
Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which it has signed and
ratified, and would welcome its early entry into force.
We submit that the ATT represents a significant
achievement in the global fight to eliminate the
diversion of conventional arms to the illicit market, and
could contribute to a reduction if not an end to untold
human suffering, particularly to women and girls, as a
result of this pernicious arms trade.

Lasting peace can be achieved only if women are
more involved in decision-making processes relating
to peacebuilding and post-conflict development, which
are necessary for the sustainable development of our
societies. It was that conviction that led Trinidad and
Tobago to introduce resolution General Assembly
65/69, the first-ever on women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control, negotiated in
2010 and adopted by consensus by the Assembly. We
look forward to the continued support of delegations
in further strengthening the resolution during the
upcoming sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly.

Trinidad and Tobago commends and supports the
significant role of United Nations agencies and bodies,
such as UN-Women, the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean, in gender-
mainstreaming initiatives and in making available
to us information on the ways in which women
have contributed and continue to contribute to the
maintenance of peace in our societies.

In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago remains
committed to working with other Member States as
well as its partners at the regional, hemispheric and
global levels to promote the involvement of women as
equal partners in matters related to peace and security,
including at all levels of the decision-making processes.

