Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you and France, Madam, for
your efforts during your presidency of the Security
Council this month and for organizing this meeting. We
wish you every success in your endeavour.

Allow me also to thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his report (S/2017/86l). We welcome
his recommendations. We stress the importance of
ensuring the full and genuine participation of women
in peace and security efforts and the need to provide
regular and necessary financing for the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. We
also welcome the Secretary-General's strategy on
gender parity.

We meet today to assess our efforts as an
international community - not only our ability
to solve conflicts, but also our ability to empower
women effectively and increase their participation in
peace negotiations, conflict prevention efforts and
humanitarian relief action, as well as in the prevention
of extremist ideologies and terrorism. Jordan attaches
great importance to women's empowerment at all
levels because they play a major role in promoting
sustainable peace.

At the national level, we have achieved progress
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. Indeed, our draft national plan has
been submitted to the Cabinet and will be ratified
soon, launching the effective implementation of the
agenda in cooperation with civil society organizations
and all governmental and military entities. We have
estimated the cost of the national plan and allocated
a quality, flexible and realistic budget to it. We stress
the importance of capacity-building and providing
financial resources and technical support. That will
help provide the necessary financial resources.

Successive Jordanian Governments have attached
importance to and prioritized women's rights and
empowerment. They have focused on increasing
women's participation in economic, social and political
life. We recently achieved great progress in introducing
legislative reforms and improving administrative and
political frameworks to end all forms of discrimination
against women and promote gender equality. The
participation of women has been improved at all levels
over the past decade in Jordan, rising to 15.4 per cent
in the Senate and House of Representatives; 18.5 per
cent in the judiciary; 35.5 per cent in political parties;
37.8 per cent in municipal councils; 21 per cent in trade
unions; and 19.9 per cent in the diplomatic corps.

Despite these achievements we continue to face
social and political challenges to women's empowerment
and gender equality, and we continue to address
these challenges. Building on that, Jordan continuously
reviews its legislation to empower women and ensure
their access to decision-making posts and increase their
political participation in elected councils. We have also
enacted rules and legislation to protect them against
violence and discrimination. Most importantly, in 2007
we adopted flexible work rules that benefit all female
workers and business-owners in the private sector,
especially those with family responsibilities. We have
also adopted a law against domestic violence to protect
and rehabilitate women. Our Parliament has also deleted
article 308 of the Penal Code, which granted impunity
to rapists by allowing them to marry their victims.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is an
opportunity to make a quantum leap in the participatory
development process to include a gender perspective in
all national development agendas. As the context of the
Jordan 2025 document and the Executive Development
Programme 2016-2019, we adopted a set of policies to
empower women in the sectors of health, education,
ending poverty, social protection and employment,
and on their participation in the labour force and in
social and political life. We also promoted women's
empowerment during the voluntary national review
of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development
Goals in July in New York, especially with respect to
Goal 5, on gender equality.
Recently, in New York, Jordan and Norway, with
the participation of 40 States, also launched the Group
of Friends on Countering and Preventing Violent
Extremism. The Group focuses on the importance of
empowering women and young people to fight violent
extremism and promote the ability of local women to
prevent conflict, respond to crises and emergencies,
and build sustainable peace. It focuses on the need
to link education to social and human sciences,
communications and media in order to build promising
generations that will work for peace. We note the major
role played by Jordan in following up on the youth,
peace and security agenda during our membership of
the Security Council in 2014 and 2015 and the adoption
of resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security.

Jordan is a pioneer at the regional and international
levels. We provide international peace and security
expertise by taking part in peacekeeping and deploying
peacekeepers, and by participating in dialogue and
mediation for peace. We also support the policy of
zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse. We
are also increasing women's participation in police
departments. Recently, we sent women police officers
to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and
expect to send female peacekeepers to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
This highlights the great importance we attach to the
contribution of women and the promotion of their roles
in peacekeeping operations. We stress the need for the
United Nations to move from peacekeeping to conflict
prevention. We must work together to address the root
causes of conflict and to prevent them. In fact, women
play a major, important and effective part in that.

We are providing a variety of services to Syrian
refugees. We offer basic education and health services
to women and men refugees in post-conflict and crisis
situations. Some 50 per cent of refugees are women and
53 per cent are young people under 18 years. We have
opened schools in refugee camps and facilitated the
inclusion of student refugees even when they lacked the
necessary documentation. Our public schools have been
working double shifts to service these students. We are
also providing gender-responsive services, including
psychosocial support and legal and medical services.
We are facilitating secure access to these services for
the most exposed and vulnerable women and girls,
especially in refugee camps and host families.

With regard to human trafficking, we have launched
the Al-Karama Centre, which protects victims of all
nationalities. Our Government is supporting small
enterprises, led by women within refugee camps and
in Jordanian society. We are facilitating their work
in the Jordanian labour market by giving them work
permits. The Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund,
which was established after the 2015 high-level review
of the women and peace and security agenda, is also
providing vital support for Syrian women refugees. It
empowers them economically, protects their rights and
fights sexual violence.

I would like to the need for the international
community to alleviate the suffering of Palestinian
women and girls under the yoke of Israeli occupation,
especially in Israeli prisons. We must provide them
with all their legitimate rights, including the right to
live in dignity.

Women play an effective and principal role in
building peace. There can be no peace in societies
without the serious and genuine participation of women.
We cannot achieve the 2030 Agenda or sustainable
peace without empowering women and girls, without
gender equality, and without ending all forms of
violence against them. We will continue to work at the
national, regional and international levels to support
the women and peace and security agenda to provide a
better future for women and girls without delay.

