Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): Let me start by
expressing our appreciation to you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on women and peace and security. I
would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his comprehensive report (S/2012/33),
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrbm, for briefing us on this
important issue.

War has always impacted men and women
differently, but probably never more so than in modern
armed conflicts. In recent armed conflicts, women and
girls have been disproportionately targeted and
constituted the majority of victims. They are also more
vulnerable to all forms of violence, in particular sexual
violence and exploitation. The report of the Secretary-
General has shown the dire plight of many women and
girls and what can be done to alleviate some of these
injustices. Viet Nam supports many of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report, as well as many views expressed during this
debate. As a country that has experience in dealing
with the consequences of wars and as the main sponsor
of resolution 1889 (2009), on women, peace and
security, Viet Nam would like to underline the
following.

First, although the international efforts in
promoting the implementation of the women, peace
and security resolutions 1325 (2000) 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) have achieved
meaningful progress, challenges still remain. Viet Nam
is of the view that the diverse nature of violence
against women and girls requires a comprehensive
approach. The United Nations therefore plays an
important role in coordinating with Member States,
relevant United Nations bodies, especially UN-Women,
civil society and other stakeholders, in promoting the
recognition and integration of women in the area of
peace and security and in intensifying international
efforts to end sexual violence against women and girls
in a coherent manner and with gender sensitivity.

Secondly, stopping sexual violence against
women in armed conflict is closely linked with
women's empowerment and gender equality. Only
when women can play a full and equal part in peace,
conflict resolution and post-conflict processes can we
build the foundation for international peace and
security. Measures to protect women and girls from
sexual violence in conflict situations should be designed
as part of a broader comprehensive framework that
covers social, economic and development issues. It is
important that gender equality should be incorporated
into all levels and stages of policymaking,
reconciliation, negotiation, the management of
humanitarian aid and post-conflict planning.
Responding to the needs of women and girls with
regard to physical security, health services, ways to
ensure their livelihoods, land and property rights and
employment will create favourable preconditions for
the coherent and long-term implementation of
necessary measures.

Thirdly, we believe that United Nations bodies
and donors should work in a coordinated and coherent
manner to assist national Governments in building
gender-related capacity in addressing the security,
recovery and development needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations. The international community
should also enhance its assistance to poor countries and
countries affected by conflicts to accelerate economic
and social development and improve people's
livelihoods, which can help to prevent conflicts at the
source and lay the foundation for enduring peace and
security.

On this occasion, View Nam would like to
reaffirm our strong commitment to working with the
international community to effectively end sexual
violence and promote the rights of women and girls.

