Mr. Hoshino (Japan): I would like to begin
by joining others in thanking the briefers for their
important insights. I will abridge my remarks today in
the light of the time constraints, and would therefore
like to ask participants to refer to the website to see
Japan's full statement.

Japan is seriously concerned about the fact that
sexual violence continues to be used as a tactic of
war, and we condemn such acts in the strongest terms.
We must put an end to sexual violence. In preventing
and deterring sexual violence, we should reflect on
its root causes, such as discrimination against women
and gender inequality. It is crucial that we support the
efforts of the United Nations and its States Members
to obtain political commitments from the parties to
conflicts to addressing these causes, and to ensure
that those commitments are implemented. In that
regard, Japan commends the important collaboration
both on joint communiques and national action plans
between the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
relevant countries.

Economic and political empowerment is one
surefire way to prevent and deter sexual violence.
Women cannot be seen merely as victims of conflict;
they are active peacebuilders and safeguards against
violent extremism. Empowering women enhances the
resilience offamilies, communities, regions and beyond.
Japan believes that the most effective contribution that
donors can make is to women's empowerment. With
that in mind, through UN-Women, we recently decided
to provide additional financial assistance of around
$18 million for women's empowerment and leadership
programmes where they are needed most.

Last year we witnessed various instances of the
liberation of territories from armed groups, and the
release or escape ofwomen and girls who had been held
by such groups, which shed light on the cruel realities
that affect women and girls in conflicts and the growing
and urgent need to ensure accountability for the
perpetrators of such acts and justice for their survivors.
Putting an end to a conflict does not necessarily mean
putting an end of sexual violence. Ifthe perpetrators are
free or remain in power, the stigma will never end, and
that can lead to distrust of Government. Where there is
impunity, people may seek their own retribution, which
in turn can easily result in relapses into conflict.

In order to address the complex issues related
to accountability, we must work to ensure the
establishment of a rule of law and justice system that
is responsive to gender in conflict and post-conflict
settings. Since 2014, Japan has been financially
supporting the work of the Team of Experts in the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, which is
being effectively deployed in some of the world's most
challenging contexts and is delivering practical results.
For example, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
a priority country for Japan and the Team of Experts.
As the country's current situation is a difficult one, we
have set up seven specialized units on sexual violence.
They provide training, mentoring, infrastructure and
technical support forjudicial investigations and mobile
courts and have brought qualitative and quantitative
improvements in the judicial response to sexual
violence. Between 1 January and 31 October 2017, these
units registered 1,726 cases of sexual and gender-based
violence that have so far resulted in 643 judgments and
represent the first-ever concrete data on accountability
for sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

In conclusion, we need concrete interventions
with concrete results, based on the concept of
human security. It is never too late for justice and
accountability. However, the sooner they come, the
sooner the healing can start and the sooner a sense of
dignity can be restored to survivors. Japan calls on the
international community to unite and take concrete
actions as steadily and as quickly as possible. Japan
will always be a part of that effort.

