Ms. Mehdiyeva (Azerbaijan): At the outset, we
would like to thank the United Kingdom presidency
for reconvening today's open debate on women and
peace and security, whose significance cannot be
overemphasized as we move collectively towards a
number of important milestones next year.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report on the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 2122 (2013) (S/2019/800).

At this juncture, converting commitment into
action should be an obvious choice and all women and
girls, regardless of their situations, must be guaranteed
equality and inclusion. Societal norms and stereotypes
that underpin gender inequalities must be countered
through education, dialogue, participation and other
effective measures. As conflicts around the world
become more complex, with record levels of forced
displacement and the lack of durable solutions, the
challenges women face and their vulnerabilities are
further exacerbated. We support the participation
of women at all stages of conflict prevention and
conflict resolution.

As a country with a large part of its territory
under military occupation, with ethnic cleansing and
other grave crimes committed against its population,
we consider the safety of civilians to be of the utmost
importance. One million Azerbaijani refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), half of them
women, have been displaced from their homes and have
continued to experience uncertainty for more than three
decades. The international community cannot remain
silent in the face of atrocity and blatant violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

As we push for concrete actions to be taken in order
to advance the women, peace and security agenda of the
Security Council, we would like to highlight the fact that
respect for international law and the implementation of
the ensuing obligations, including those contained in
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, are

prerequisites for effectively upholding the rights of
internally displaced women in Azerbaijan.

Azerbaijan has taken extensive measures to improve
the situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs). In 2018 alone, 156,000 IDPs were
provided with new housing. The State Committee for
Family, Women's and Children's Affairs, together with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
has carried out two projects over the past five years to
prevent and eliminate gender-based violence among
refugees and IDPs.

The most effective strategy to empower women
and girls is to pre-emptively address barriers limiting
their ability to reach full their potential. In this regard,
enacting gender-responsive policies and mechanisms
can create an environment that is supportive and
conducive to women's success. We concur with the
Secretary-General that the economic empowerment of
women as a prevention strategy in conflict and post-
conflict phases and as a prerequisite for sustainable
development must be prioritized. Women are critical to
economic growth and community stability.

Azerbaijan attaches great importance to the
empowerment of women. By identifying barriers
through improved data collection in recent years, we
have been able to implement policies and programmes
tailored to the specific needs of women and girls.
In 2016 and 2017, the State Committee for Family,
Women's and Children's Affairs, together with the
United Nations Population Fund, carried out a project
on the elaboration of the national action plan on women,
peace and security. A working group on women,
peace and security, representing various stakeholders,
was established for this purpose and oversaw the
preparation of the draft national action plan. The draft
plan is currently under consideration.

In May 2018, the State Committee held the fifth
Women's Forum, dedicated to the 100th anniversary
of women's suffrage in Azerbaijan. This event marked
one of the most important milestones in the history
of Azerbaijan, which granted women the right to vote
in 1918.

Women account for 48.2 per cent of the workforce.
We have made great strides in achieving gender
parity in State institutions. The proportion of women
appointed to key Government positions has significantly
increased in recent years. The representation of women
in the National Assembly grew from 11 per cent in 2005
to 17 per cent in 2015. At the municipal level, women
represent 35 per cent of elected candidates.

Azerbaijan is a party to all major international
agreements in the field of women's empowerment and
gender equality. We remain committed to advancing the
rights of women and ensuring their full and effective
participation in the decision-making processes.

