Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my appreciation to Spain for
organizing this debate. Its convening, which coincides
with the official launch of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime Global Report on Trafi'icking in
Persons, should be viewed as an important message
by the United Nations and its States Member that
trafficking in persons will not be tolerated under any
circumstances and should be decisively dealt with.
Today's debate can enrich the General Assembly's high-
level meeting planned for October 2017 to review the
progress achieved in the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons. We also underline the leading role of the
General Assembly in considering this subject.

Given the transborder nature of the crime of
trafficking, coordination and cooperation at the
international level are necessary for combating it. The
international community has to further strengthen
and impose effective measures to prevent, combat and
eliminate all forms of trafficking in persons. To that
end, demand for trafficking victims should be addressed
and suppressed, and protection for victims should be
ensured, particularly for women and children, who are
mostly subject to forced labour, exploitation, violence
and sexual abuse.

In combating trafficking in persons,
one cannot overlook the root causes of the
phenomenon 4 poverty, underdevelopment,
unemployment, lack of socioeconomic opportunities
and lack of security, especially in conflict situations,
as well as instability caused by different internal and
external factors, including foreign occupation, foreign
intervention and regime-change policies. All those
elements continue to make people victims of human
trafficking. With regard to today's debate, an increasing
number of armed conflicts and the resulting mass
movements of people have caused an alarming situation.

The indecisiveness of the world community in
fighting terrorists such as Da'esh and the Al-Nusra
Front in Iraq and Syria or Boko Haram in Africa, due
to narrowly defined geopolitical gains, has proved to
be destructive in the global fight against trafficking in
persons. The abhorrent reports of sexual enslavement
of innocent women and girls and other atrocities
committed by those criminals are the tragedies of our
age and of the twenty-first century. Those Governments
and individuals that are supporting those criminals
financially, logistically or ideologically should be held
accountable and brought to justice.

In that regard, takfiri ideologies that justify such
abhorrent acts are to be blamed first, as they provide
the necessary mental grounds. The sad trafficking
of women and girls in the Middle East and Africa by
terrorist groups could only have happened within such
horrendous mindsets. Such criminality begins in the
minds of men, and it is in the minds of men that we can
fight them.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, at the crossroads
of drug trafficking, has first-hand experiences on the
deadly nexus that could be forged between human
trafficking networks and other criminal activities,
including money-laundering, prostitution, slavery
and drug trafficking. It is therefore essential that the
international community constantly bear in mind the
existence of links between different forms of criminal
activities and trafficking in persons. We prefer to
address them in an integrated manner.

