Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): At the outset, let me
thank the presidency of Uganda for organizing this
very important open debate of the Security Council.

Our appreciation is also due to the Secretary-
General, the Under-Secretaries-General, the President
of the Economic and Social Council, the representative
of the Civil Society Advisory Group on Women, Peace
and Security, and other ministers and representatives of
several Member States who spoke earlier today,
offering their visionary guidance, commitment and
directives for women's empowerment in the context of
peace and security.

We also offer our heartiest congratulations and a
very warm welcome to Ms. Michelle Bachelet on her
appointment as Executive Director of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women and Under-Secretary-General
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women.
We assure her of our fullest support.

Ten years ago, the Security Council adopted the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security. Bangladesh, a member of the Council at
that time and one of the core sponsors of the
resolution, was closely associated with the adoption of
this historic document, which endeavours to ensure
women's rights and roles in peace and security. The
provisions of the document apply not only to States,
but also to actors involved in post-conflict peace
processes. We take a modicum of pride for what we did
a decade ago.

We are, however, disappointed to note that
violence against women and girls is ongoing, as
delineated in various reports. As has been noted,
women and girls suffer most as victims of conflict,
while in the peace process they are mostly deprived of
the dividends. Women and girls are often Viewed as
bearers of cultural identities. Thus, they become prime
targets. Therefore, the onus lies on us to ensure that the
oppression of women and girls, particularly based on
gender, is stopped forever.

We are well aware that poverty, the struggle for
scarce resources, and socio-economic injustices lie at
the heart of conflicts, and all of them sadly create
breeding grounds for such social blights, including
violence against women and girls. The repercussions
not only impact on the safety and security of women
and girls, but also exacerbate political and economic
situations, as well as the security of nations. Therefore,
protecting women's rights is not an option, but an
obligation that requires coordinated action from all of
us.

We recognize that empowering women will lead
to their taking command of resources and assuming
adequate leadership capabilities for the efficient
management of those resources. Therefore, we
emphasize the fulfilment of the economic needs of
women and the necessity of their engagement
internationally at all levels and in all forms of decision-
making processes.

While the former could be achieved by ensuring
women's access to and participation in income-
generating and entrepreneurial activities such as micro-
credit, education, vocational training and public health,
the latter could be ensured through the recruitment of
women, particularly to senior-level positions of the
United Nations, including in the posts of Assistant
Secretaries-General, Under-Secretaries-General and
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General. In
order to obtain a clearer understanding of the needs of
southern women, we have to ensure that women from
the global South get due recognition in the
consideration of such recruitment. For proper
coordination with the field, the fair representation of
troop- and police-contributing countries must be
ensured, as decided previously by the General
Assembly and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.

From our national perspective, I deem it a
privilege to make a few remarks about gender
mainstreaming in Bangladesh. It is now universally
known that women occupy the top political leadership
in our country. The Constitution of Bangladesh
guarantees the equality of men and women within the
broad framework of non-discrimination on the grounds
of religion, race and gender. The Government has
adopted a national policy for women's advancement
and a national plan of action. A women's development
implementation committee, headed by the Minister for
Women's and Children Affairs, monitors the
implementation of policies for women's empowerment.
The result is highly positive. To cite just one example,
the enrolment of girls in both primary and secondary
schools exceeds that of boys, helped by waivers of
tuition and the provision of stipends for girls in
secondary schools.

The Government has enacted laws for protecting
women against domestic violence and is currently
implementing a number of projects for developing the
capabilities of women. Many affirmative actions have
been taken that help women in distress and old age. In
order to involve women in decision-making processes,
the Government has adopted a quota system for women
in our national Parliament and in the recruitment of our
civil service officers, alongside direct elections and
open competition.

In the maintenance of international peace and
security, we take pride in our modest contribution of
troops and police to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The recruitment of women to police forces
and the military amply demonstrates our commitment
to women's empowerment in both the national and the
international arenas. We are pleased that we were able
to deploy a full contingent of an all-female formed
police unit to the friendly country Haiti following the
devastating earthquake there.

I am pleased to recount that our all-male troop
contingents are fully briefed on gender issues. We hope
that sufficient further training will be arranged to
reinforce their understanding of these issues. We are
aware that we need to mainstream a gender perspective
into all conflict prevention activities and strategies,
develop effective gender-sensitive early warning
mechanisms and institutions, and strengthen efforts to
prevent violence against women, including various
forms of gender-based violence.

In conclusion, I would reiterate that we in
Bangladesh have been making our best efforts to
ensure women's empowerment and participation in all
spheres of life. We realize that much more needs to be
done. We are willing to replicate in our national policy
any good practices that we come across globally, and
are similarly ready to share our relevant experience
with others.
