Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank South Africa for
convening today's open debate and the briefers for their
briefings and recommendations.

Gender equality, the promotion and protection
of women's rights and women's full political, social
and economic participation and empowerment play a
key role in preventing and resolving armed conflicts.
Furthermore, the role of women in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, the prevention of sexual violence and the
protection of women and children is not only necessary,
it is crucial. Alaa Salah and her extraordinary story
provide us with an example of how the voices of young
women carry a powerful and transforming force.

Despite the resolutions that have been adopted
and the indisputable progress that has been made,
we continue to face challenges in implementing the
women and peace and security agenda. Although it
has acquired normative force since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we believe that it is vital to
strengthen the commitments already made by all actors
so as to promote the agenda in their own countries
and advance its full implementation. In that process,
it is fundamental to ensure that we cooperate with
and support the members of civil society, including
women peacebuilders, young women and human rights
defenders, who play a central role in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. However, the threats,
intimidation and Violence to which they are subjected
make it a matter of urgency to establish and strengthen
mechanisms to protect them. In Syria's nascent political
process, thanks to facilitation by the United Nations and
the Security Council, the makeup of its Constitutional
Committee, which is called on to bring about a national
political transformation, is about 30 per cent women.
It is crucial to assure them of a safe and inclusive
environment at this critical juncture in building peace
in Syria.

The Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security has served as a key platform for
improving the implementation of the agenda on the
ground. We remain committed to working to facilitate
a more holistic approach to the work of the Council,
including in its resolutions, reports and field visits. In
countless contexts, gender inequality, exacerbated by
the indiscriminate actions of armed groups and the
proliferation ofweapons, constitutes one ofthe principal
causes of Violence, particularly gender-based violence.

We defend the importance of linking the rights
of women to peacebuilding. For that reason, it is vital
to train peacekeepers and to take gender issues into
account in the design, planning, implementation and
evaluation of peace operations, as well as the increase
in the number of women deployed as troops. It is
crucial to include gender-disaggregated data in mission
reports, deploy gender advisers and women's protection
advisers and strengthen zero-tolerance policies for
acts of sexual violence or discrimination on the basis
of gender.

We commend the work of the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department
of Peace Operations and UN-Women and take this
opportunity to praise the initiative to strengthen
cooperation, which enables access to political and
technical skills pertaining to the issue of women and
peace and security, in support of the collective efforts
of the United Nations system.

In conclusion, we reiterate that the Dominican
Republic will continue its efforts to advance the women
and peace and security agenda, in the belief it will
lead to lasting peace and social transformation, with a
view to ending gender inequalities, which undermine
peace and security and fuel grievances, extremism
and conflict.

