Ms. Dandi (spoke in French): My name is Helene
Dandi Lou, from Cote d'Ivoire. I am responsible for a
peace organization. I am one of the 1,000 women
nominated for the 2005 Nobel Peace Prize.

At the outset, I would like to express my deepest
appreciation to the Government of Romania, the
members of the Security Council and the Non-
Governmental Organization Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security for giving me the honour
of speaking before the Council.

I take this opportunity to thank, on behalf of my
country, Cote d'Ivoire, and in particular on behalf of
women and children, the organizers of this meeting, the
international community, the Economic Community of
West African States and the African Union, as well as
all those individuals of goodwill who are sparing no
effort to restore peace to Cote d'Ivoire.

I also welcome the Council's statement of
14 October 2005, which endorsed the proposals of the
African Union to resolve the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire. I
sincerely thank the African Union Mediator in the Cote
d'Ivoire crisis, His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
President of the Republic of South Africa, for the real
efforts he has made in favour of a prompt return of
peace in my country.

However, it is important to stress that this peace
has been contested by the opposition, which claims that
the United Nations has created a situation of great
uncertainty for C6te d'Ivoire through its decision to
maintain in power His Excellency Mr. Laurent Gbagbo
for a period of 12 months. The purpose of my presence
among you is to share our vision of the importance of
the commitment of women to all activities in support
of peace. It is about presenting an analysis of the
participation of women in the peace process in C6te
d'Ivoire and to make a series of recommendations for
the better promotion and implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the more
effective participation by women in the peace and
security process.

Concerning such an analysis, resolution 1325
(2000) requires that women be present in all actions of
the United Nations involving reconstruction,
consolidation and the maintenance of peace and
security.

In Cote d'Ivoire, the coup of 1999 and the
military transition that ended with the controversial
elections held on 2 November 2000 that put President
Gbagbo in office have left us with a number of latent
conflicts within the population that could add to the
weakening of the social fabric.

In order to re-establish social cohesion, a Forum
of National Reconciliation was initiated in October
2001 by His Excellency, Laurent Gbagbo, President of
the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire. It was the first genuine
opportunity offered to Ivorian women to become
actively involved in the search for peace.
Unfortunately, that platform did not attract widespread
participation by women and women's organizations
that were working for peace. In fact, a number of
women, unaware of the existence of resolution 1325
(2000), were unable to make use of the opportunity to
prevent the risk of the conflicts that were spreading
throughout the country. Rather, they were weighed
down by a guilty silence that left male politicians the
latitude to poison the situation.

At that time, I tried to make others aware that we
needed to show restraint in order to save Cote d'Ivoire.
However the limited participation by women and the
lack of concerted action among them did not permit
them to obtain effective results.
With the outbreak of the crisis in September
2002, actions to promote resolution 1325 (2000)
evolved and favoured greater participation on the part
of Ivorian women in the process of restoring peace and
security. However, those actions were limited to certain
women leaders and could not reach the grass-roots
community organizations for a number of reasons.
They include the following: sociocultural factors
relating to the role of women in African society that
reduce them to a state of silence, the high illiteracy rate
among women, the lack of means of action for the
efficient promotion of resolution 1325 (2000) and for
the effective involvement of women in the prevention
and the resolution of conflicts, the low economic
capabilities of women and the low level of financing of
programmes supporting women.

In order to bring peace back to Cote d'Ivoire, a
number of peace agreements were signed, without the
effective participation of women, except for a few who
belonged to political parties that were involved in the
crisis. From Lome to Pretoria II, via Marcoussis, Accra
I, II and III and Pretoria I, women have been ignored,
indeed sidelined, from the process, despite the active
involvement of the United Nations as the major
guarantor of the promotion and implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Why is that the case? We
women want to know why the resolution has not been
implemented. It is not surprising to note the passivity
of women in the process of restoring peace and
security, since they have not been made part of the
discussion.

Today, my country, Cote d'Ivoire, remains
divided. The social climate is characterized by a crisis
of confidence and visceral hatred. Insecurity is
recurrent throughout the country, and it is the women
and children who continue to pay the heavy price. They
still carry the stigma of trauma and they live in silence.
As an example, in the area of Bouake, an occupied
area, and in the western part of the country, which was
terribly affected by the war, there are thousands of
women who have been raped since 2002. They live
alone, completely bereft, and until now have not
received any medical, psychological or material
assistance.

In spite of it all, resolution 1633 (2005) on the
Cote d'Ivoire, adopted by the Security Council on 21
October 2005, does not mention the role of women, nor
does it even consider gender. I would like to know why
not.

It seems essential to us to bring out the strengths
and weaknesses of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
suggest recommendations to provide for better
implementation of that resolution.

In terms of strengths, the resolution does give
more responsibility to women in decision-making
bodies. It gives more power to women to act in favour
of peace and security. It takes into account women's
priorities. It has awakened conscience among women
and gives them the power to be heard.

The weaknesses of resolution 1325 (2000) lie in
its lack of effective implementation. The resolution is
unknown to women at the grassroots levels. The means
to act on and implement the resolution are insufficient.
It is not being implemented by States. The resolution is
not being sufficiently implemented by institutions,
including the United Nations. There are no mandatory
measures to prompt States to effectively implement the
resolution. The resolution does not create conditions
for its optimal use by women, given that it should be a
powerful weapon in their hands. Resources for women
working for peace are insufficiently utilized by the
United Nations and there, too, we would like to know
why not. There is no follow-up in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

On the basis of all of those points, it is important
to make the following proposals. First, Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) should become known
within associations, in women's cooperatives, in urban
and rural areas. Secondly, clubs should be established
for its promotion and popularization among women's
movements. Thirdly, the media should become
involved in promoting the resolution by disseminating
it throughout each country. Fourthly, a follow-up team
should be established to ensure its implementation.
Fifthly, women's capacity in the areas of prevention,
mediation and management of conflicts should be
strengthened. Sixthly, documents about resolution 1325
(2000) should be made available to women's
organizations. Seventh, financial and concrete support
should be provided through grants to women's
organizations that are working for peace, security and
development so they can be more effective in their
work.

Additionally, it is important to organize
conferences, town-hall meetings and workshops on
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) in order to
develop some proposals that will help us better to
promote the resolution; to establish follow-up
committees on resolution 1325 (2000) in order to
ensure its effective implementation by States and
produce reports for the United Nations Security
Council; to create a platform for exchanges among
women displaced by war and refugee women so as to
allow them to get to know one another, exchange views
and have their voices be heard as the major casualties
and bring them to contribute to the process of peace
and security and to help promote Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000); prioritize the financing of
economic activities for women who are victims of war
and to motivate them motivated and facilitate their
effective involvement in the processes of peace and
security and promotion of the Security Council
resolution. Before concluding, I wish to reiterate my
sincere thanks to the Security Council for this laudable
initiative, which today has allowed women to be heard.

It is true that peace must absolutely come from
the Ivorians; at the same time, I would like to call on
the international community and on African
institutions, such ECOWAS and the AU and all people
of good will and peace-loving people to tirelessly
pursue their efforts to bring about a final return to
peace in my country, Cote d'Ivoire.

With respect to involving women in the peace
process, our experience on the ground demonstrates
that the financial autonomy of urban and rural women
is a major factor in motivating them and enabling them
to become more actively involved for peace. The
refugee and displaced women whom we have met say
that true peace is first of all the freedom to move
freely, to have the wherewithal to educate their
children, to carry out economic activities and to get
back their dignity by improving their social conditions.

I would like to conclude my statement by
recalling that women are a very effective element in
the prevention and management of conflicts, because
women are at the centre of communities. As a spouse, a
woman can convince her husband. As a mother and
teacher, she can talk to her children. As a sister, she
can speak to her brothers in order to deter them from
taking weapons to kill. That is why, as long as women
are barred from the negotiating table owing to their
social status or their gender, it will be difficult to talk
about sustainable peace throughout the world and, in
particular, in Africa.

Without women, what is the future of Cote
d'Ivoire? Without women, what is the future of Africa?
Without women, what is the future of mankind?

