Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Ijoin
other speakers in thanking you, Sir, and your
delegation for having organized this Council meeting
at a timely moment, when we are about to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security. I
also thank Ms. Margot Wallstrom for her briefing and
congratulate her on her appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and for the commitment she has
shown to implementing her mandate in her brief
tenure. I also thank Ms. Rachel Mayanja for her
briefing on the set of indicators that will undoubtedly
make it easier to monitor implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and other relevant Security Council
resolutions. I thank the multidisciplinary team for its
work in developing the indicators, especially the
United Nations Development Fund for Women for its
technical work.
Mexico considers it key that all parties to a
conflict have an obligation to respect and enforce
international humanitarian law. My country also
believes that international human rights law must be
fully respected in order to protect women and girls, as
well as internally displaced and refugee women, during
and after conflicts. From that perspective, we
acknowledge the fundamental role played by women in
all phases of armed conflict. Women are relevant actors
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and as
engines of reconstruction. Despite the fact that women
and children are the principal victims of violence, they
have the strength and the courage to be agents of
change in their communities and to promote national
reconciliation. Women are part of the solution to the
structural problems of conflicts and yet, because they
lack effective tools and mechanisms to guarantee their
participation, ongoing inequalities perpetuate spirals of
violence and delay the resolution of conflicts.

Fifteen years after the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action addressed the issue of women in
armed conflict as a priority area, and 10 years after the
Security Council launched a broad agenda in favour of
women, the facts indicate that progress has been
unsatisfactory and that, in some cases, alarming
reversals have been observed.

The tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) should be an opportunity to
strengthen the agenda of women, peace and security.
The Security Council took a step in that direction by
requesting the Secretary-General to submit a set of
indicators that would track progress in the
implementation of this agenda. In the coming months,
the Council should redouble its efforts to clearly define
an improved way for the United Nations to track the
role of women in conflict situations and to help States
to devise measures with a gender perspective in the
areas of prevention, participation, protection and
recovery and to strengthen their regulatory and
institutional frameworks.

To that end, it will be essential to work in
coordination with the various agencies responsible for
this issue and to maintain broad dialogue with United
Nations Member States and other relevant actors, such
as women's organizations and civil society, in seeking
the Council's support in October. The indicators should
serve as a tool to enable countries to assess their own
progress. The cooperation of the States concerned is
therefore essential.
My country supports the set of indicators and the
recommendations presented in the report (S/2010/ 173).
We are ready to examine in depth the technical,
operational and financial aspects necessary for their
speedy implementation. The indicators are a valuable
instrument for planning and decision-making and can
also be used as a diagnostic tool and a road map. We
agree with the Secretary-General that, in order to have
a full assessment of the situation, the indicators must
be clearly linked and mutually reinforcing. Thus, if any
one aspect is left out, there is a danger that only some
of the challenges and problems affecting women will
be apparent.

While some indicators have been designed for
countries or regions affected by armed conflict, my
country believes they correspond to a comprehensive
and multidimensional focus on security that includes
the gender perspective as one of its main aspects. They
can therefore be used as a guide for all States if
considered from a perspective of prevention and shared
responsibility.

In short, it seems to us that the indicators will be
useful to the wider work of the United Nations for the
empowerment of women and gender equality. The
establishment of the new gender entity will boost the
United Nations institutional capacity to attain those
goals.

The women and girls who daily suffer the
violence unleashed by armed conflicts cannot wait
another 10 years. The decisions that we adopt today to
protect the rights of women and to ensure their
participation will be the best investment towards
achieving a future of peace and stability.

I conclude by expressing my delegation's support
for the draft presidential statement facilitated by the
delegation of Japan.

