Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): Since the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), much
progress has been made on the protection of women and
girls in armed conflict. However, civilians, especially
women and girls, continue to be caught up in armed
conflicts around the world, thereby facing increased
threat and violence. From Syria to Iraq and from the
Central African Republic to South Sudan, the plight
and vulnerabilities of women and girls are aggravated
by sexual and gender-based violence. As recognized
in resolution 2122 (2013), women and girls continue
to be exposed to extensive human-rights violations in
conflict and post-conflict settings. Bearing in mind our
shared concern, I would like to make a few observations
on this important issue.

First, the Security Council must integrate issues
relating to women and peace and security into its work
in a more systematic way. While we recognize that
it has incorporated gender perspectives into several
resolutions, particularly those related to United Nations
peacekeeping mission mandates, we further encourage
the Council to provide clear, decisive and consistent
protection mandates concerning women and girls. At
the same time, in order to fully implement the zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
initiated by the Secretary-General, it is important
that we stress gender perspectives in United Nations
peacekeepers' predeployment training. Dispatching
more women protection advisers, and expanding
sanction designation criteria to include gross violations
against women, is a practical measure that can be taken
to facilitate concrete results on the ground.

Secondly, women's empowerment and participation
must be strengthened in the peacekeeping, post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding processes. Their needs,
priorities and voices should be reflected in the relevant
decision-making processes. Official development
assistance (ODA) should be expanded to help improve
women's capacity in that area.

Thirdly, accountability is key to the protection
of women and girls in armed conflict. The Security
Council can employ various means to end impunity
for those who harm women and girls, such as making
referrals to the International Criminal Court and
mandating international commissions of inquiry. Given
the equal importance of ensuring accountability at the
national level, we recognize the ongoing efforts to
strengthen the capacity of national justice systems by
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict established pursuant to resolution
1888 (2009).

The Government of the Republic of Korea has been
making great efforts to promote the human rights of
women in fragile and conflict-affected areas, including
providing predeployment training on gender equality
for all persons dispatched to peacekeeping operations,
as well as implementing ODA projects designed to
promote women's empowerment in conflict situations,
as described in our national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea, as a strong
supporter of resolution 1325 (2000) and the United
Kingdom's Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative,
reaffirms its commitment to international efforts to
protect women and girls in armed conflict.

