Mrs. Tripathi (India): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's open debate on this important
issue. We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/900) and all of the briefers for their statements.

The normative and operative frameworks relating
to the women and peace and security agenda have been
considerably strengthened across the United Nations
system over the past two decades. Today there is a greater
awareness of the centrality of women's meaningful
participation in peace processes and ofthe incorporation
of gender perspectives into United Nations peace and
security efforts. We appreciate the Secretary-General's
emphasis and achievements on gender parity among the
United Nations senior leadership.

The importance of women's active engagement
and leadership is now well established in peace and
reconciliation processes and in countering the spread of
violent extremism. Action-oriented initiatives such as
the African Women Leaders Network, and encouraging
results from peace processes, including in Colombia
and Guinea-Bissau, affirm women's important role in
bringing transformative changes. Despite those efforts,
women's roles and perspectives in peace processes
remain largely neglected. Sexual violence, abductions
and human trafficking continue to be used as weapons
of war by non-State actors and terrorist organizations
in armed conflicts. Rapidly expanding transboundary
criminal networks finance terror, supply arms, recruit
and train foreign fighters, and destabilize whole
regions, which disproportionately affects women.
The large-scale movements of refugees resulting from
armed conflicts increase women's vulnerability to
discrimination and exploitation. No country is in a
position to effectively counter those challenges alone.

The issue of women and peace and security also
has to be viewed in a wider societal context, involving
gender and development issues that are dealt with
outside the Council. The mutually reinforcing roles
of gender-responsive development and the building of
peaceful and resilient societies are well recognized.
The normative work being done outside the Council in
that regard, including in the Commission on the Status
of Women and the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women must continue to
inform our actions. The normative work done by
UN-Women and other agencies such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is of relevance
for building capacities. The Peacebuilding Fund has
committed more than one third of its funding to gender-
mainstreaming programmes.

As the General Assembly focuses on gender-
sensitive and inclusive development to build peaceful
and resilient societies, the Council must push for
effective cooperation on countering terrorism, which
threatens peace and security. It must make every effort
to realize the full potential of integrating considerations
of women and peace and security into sanctions regimes.
The Council's Sanctions Committees should address
the issue of proactively listing terrorist individuals and
entities involved in sexual and gender-based violence
in armed conflict. International cooperation on the
prosecution of criminals engaged in transnational
crimes is important in order to ensure justice for the
victims, many of whom are women and girls.

In India, the discourse on women's empowerment
has progressed from viewing women as beneficiaries
of welfare schemes to mainstreaming their concerns
and harnessing their leadership for inclusive
development. More than 1.3 million directly elected
women representatives participate in formulating and
implementing gender-responsive policies in India.
Gender-based budgeting has proved beneficial for
the mainstreaming of gender perspectives in policy
implementation across sectors.

India is committed to a higher representation of
women in peacekeeping missions and has fulfilled its
pledge to ensure that 15 per cent of military observers
are women. The landmark first-ever deployment by
the United Nations of an all-female Indian formed
police unit in Liberia became a role model for local
women to participate in policing and the relevant
rule-of-law frameworks. India is also committed to
providing a second such formed police unit. India
partners UN-Women in capacity-building initiatives
at the New Delhi-based Centre for United Nations
Peacekeeping, which has now conducted a third United
Nations female military officers course for 40 women
officers from 26 countries. We also provide adequate
predeployment training on gender sensitization to our
peacekeeping forces.

We fully support the Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance approach to sexual exploitation and abuse
and his strong commitment to achieving gender parity
in peace operations. India stands ready to engage with
our partners to work towards ensuring the meaningful
participation of women and the mainstreaming of
women and peace and security considerations in
building inclusive, peaceful and resilient societies.

