Mr. Berger (Germany): I thank Great Britain for
organizing this debate and Secretary Hague in particular
for his personal commitment. I also congratulate the
United States on having so ably negotiated resolution
2106 (2013) adopted today.

We also thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative Zainab Bangura and commend
them for their leadership, as well as today's briefers.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

We welcome the focus of today's debate on
addressing accountability and the fight against
impunity. Let me be clear - our ultimate goal has to
be, first and foremost, the prevention of sexual violence
in conflict. In cases where acts of sexual violence have
already occurred, it is indispensable that perpetrators
be immediately brought to justice and survivors receive
adequate support and redress. Only effective criminal
prosecution during and after conflict will lead to an
equally effective prevention system that can help to
create long-term peace.

Let me stress some important points and provide
some practical examples. First, it cannot be stressed
enough that part of any effective prevention of sexual
Violence is the equal involvement of women. Not only
the consideration of their special needs, but also their
participation in all stages of decision-making processes
are essential. This also applies to programmes such
as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform and transitional justice. In this
regard, Germany has supported, inter alia, a regional
project in the Horn of Africa to empower women by
helping them to gain access to political and economical
decision-making processes.

Secondly, when sexual violence constitutes a crime
against humanity, a war crime or even genocide, it has
to be subject to punishment and has to be excluded from
amnesty provisions. Whenever States are not willing
or capable to fulfil their responsibility to prosecute
perpetrators accordingly, the international community
must react in order to prevent a culture of impunity, as
was recently stressed at the Group of Eight meeting in
the United Kingdom. Regional justice mechanisms and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) can also play an
important role. We also welcome the work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict in Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Bangura's Office in this regard.

The German Centre for International Peace
Operations offers special pre-deployment courses on
establishing the rule of law, which emphasize the need
to prosecute sexual violence and raise awareness for
gender-based violence.

Thirdly, appropriate medical and psychosocial
support for survivors of sexual violence, including
access to sexual reproductive health services, as well
as access to justice and reparations, are fundamental
prerequisites for the effective reintegration of women
into their respective societies. Germany has, for
example, funded several medical counseling centres
in Congo, where women can receive medical and
psychological support, as well as emergency HIV post-
exposure prophylaxis. We also support transitional
justice mechanisms, such as truth and reconciliation
committees, and dialogue between these and women's
rights organizations.

Lastly, our full support is needed by those who
are essential to the fight against the scourge of sexual
violence, such as human rights defenders, doctors and
journalists, who are themselves at special risk.

Let me end by stressing that the Security Council
has a role to play in monitoring the commitments made
by parties to conflicts. In this regard, it can and should do
more to hold perpetrators accountable. Without having
to create a new mechanism, it could already make use
of the tools at hand, for example by reacting to cases
of sexual violence in a certain country with Security
Council press statements, by writing specific letters to
concerned Governments or by referring specific cases
more frequently to the Sanctions Committees and, as a
last resort, to the ICC.

