Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan thanks
the Peruvian presidency for highlighting the need to
prevent conflict-related sexual violence by ensuring
empowerment, gender equality and access to justice.
We commend Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, for so succinctly presenting the key
aspects of the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/250),
as well as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila
Patten, on the important work of her Office. We
also thank Ms. Razia Sultana for her passionate and
informative, although horrifying, analysis of the
situation concerning sexual violence against Rohingya
women and women of other ethnic groups in Myanmar.

Kazakhstan supports the findings and
recommendations of the Secretary-General's annual
report. Despite the robust normative framework and
the progress achieved, conflict-related sexual violence
remains at an alarmingly high level. More troubling
yet, sexual violence is aggravated by human trafficking
and is used as a tactic of war and source of income by
armed groups, terrorist organizations and transnational
organized crime networks. This scourge therefore
requires concerted and well-coordinated cross-national
interventions with a One United Nations approach.
All efforts by United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict require
improved coordination with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL, and regional and
subregional organizations and initiatives, such as the
African Women Leaders Network, in the areas of
prevention, information-sharing and documentation,
assistance to Victims, training of security forces, legal
assistance and exchange of good practices in combating
sexual violence. It is also crucial to bring women to the
negotiating table at the highest levels and to emphasize
the responsibility of host Governments and regional
organizations to provide momentum.
The State has the primary responsibility for
enacting legislation to respond to sexual violence and for
strengthening the law enforcement and criminal justice
system, in addition to increasing the representation of
women in the military and police services. National
legislative responses around the world should be
harmonized and made compatible with United Nations
standards. We commend the Team of Experts for its
continuing technical assistance to Member States and
call on the international community to ensure the
needed funding for the Team.

High-level field visits by the Security Council and
the United Nations, such as the African Union-United
Nations joint mission to African countries led by the
Deputy Secretary-General in July 2017, are important
to create awareness around the women and peace and
security agenda, and should become a regular practice.

Sexual violence affects every aspect of a survivor's
life. The Secretary-General's report underscores
the fact that conflict-related sexual violence leads to
the stigmatization of victims and the devastation of
physical and economic security, especially ofdisplaced,
minority and rural women. Therefore, as Ms. Sultana
so eloquently argued, victims should receive full,
competent and speedy attention, with increased access
to health care, psychosocial support, legal assistance
and socioeconomic reintegration, along with improved
camp management. We must support the safe, voluntary
and sustainable return of displaced populations and
refugees. Cooperation with religious leaders, civil
society and local communities is most important in
order to change extremist narratives, shift the stigma
of sexual violence from the victims to the perpetrators,
promote education and create awareness around the
empowerment of women. The entire community often
needs healing, and therefore this must be given full
attention in the context of truth and reconciliation
commissions and transitional justice.

We absolutely agree with all the briefers today
and with the report of the Secretary-General that the
international community should ensure accountability
for all cases of sexual violence in conflict and bring
about a resolute end to impunity. State and non-State
parties to a conflict must be pressured to comply with
international law. States need to work with Security
Council sanctions committees, which must include,
where appropriate, sexual violence as designated
criteria for sanctions against individuals and
organized networks.

We strongly believe that preventing sexual
exploitation and abuse by the peacekeepers should be an
absolute priority, with zero tolerance for such offences.
Peacekeeping missions must include protecting
civilians, especially women and girls, as a fundamental
element in their mandates, including greater
recruitment of women military and police officers.
Besides that, all troops and police contingents should
have full training prior to and during deployment. We
support the deployment of women's protection advisers
to peacekeeping missions, with ensured long-term and
sustainable funding for their work.

Kazakhstan integrates the women and peace and
security agenda in its national legislation, including
formulating new strong pro-women policies that will
guarantee women's engagement in decision-making
at all levels in the political and economic life of
the country. Training on gender equality for the armed
and security forces and deploying women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations are also priorities.

Attheregionallevel,we are focusingonAfghanistan,
with a multidimensional approach to conflict
prevention and resolution, recovery and reintegration,

accompanied by humanitarian and development
assistance that is carried out by strengthening the
security-development nexus. In cooperation with Japan
and the United Nations Development Programme,
Kazakhstan has launched a project for gender equality
in Afghanistan, which also focuses on providing policy
support and capacity development.

At the international level, we are contributing to
the United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against
Women, which funds projects in post-conflict settings.

In conclusion, we are ready to work with the
international community as part of every multilateral
effort that promotes the central elements of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the new
agenda for peace related to gender empowerment.

