Mr. Waxman (Israel): Let me begin by thanking
you, Sir, for convening this important debate. It brings
much needed awareness and attention to an important
subject. I would also like to recognize the excellent work
done by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura,
and her team.

This fall will mark 13 years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000) and three
years since it adopted resolution 1960 (2010). Those
resolutions reflect the international community's
desire to advance gender equality and denounce sexual
violence in conflict. While those aspirations are the
subject of frequent discussions and debates within these
halls, on the ground - where it really counts - women
continue to be marginalized and victimized. Around
the world, at least one woman in every three has
been beaten, coerced into sex or otherwise abused in
her lifetime. International resolve must be met with
concrete action.

We cannot hope to tackle the issue of sexual
violence in conflict while even in times of peace women
are victims of gender bias and discrimination. The first
step is to address the significant gaps that exist in many
countries' legal systems. Violence against women takes
root in cultures of discrimination that relegate women
to second-class citizens and deny them the political,
legal and economic rights that men enjoy.

Israel believes that women's rights are integral to
building a just society in which all citizens live free
of violence and their human rights are respected and
protected. Israel is proud to sponsor resolution 2106
(2013) as we have with all previous resolutions on
women and peace and security.

It is the legal and moral obligation of all States to
protect women and girls from sexual Violence. There
must be a system oflaw and justice that leaves no doubt
that sexual intimidation and violence aimed at women
is inexcusable. In the Middle East, many legal systems
do not meet basic international standards when it comes
to protecting women. In some instances, marital rape
is not regarded as a criminal offence, and there are
no procedures in place to deal with cases of domestic
sexual abuse.

In certain States, thousands of women are victims
of so-called honour killings. Owing to weak and
indifferent justice systems, perpetrators who claim to
have preserved family honour are rarely prosecuted,
or if they are, they receive light sentences. In those
instances, women are victimized twice - first by the
perpetrator of the crime and then by an indifferent
justice system. Often, rape survivors are forced to
marry their rapists, and there are countless examples
in which women and girls have been imprisoned for
so-called moral crimes.
In Syria, under Bashar Al-Assad's brutal regime,
the death toll has surpassed 93,000, and more than
one-third of the population requires humanitarian
assistance. The Syrian army and its State-sponsored
militia, known as the Shabbiha, have employed sexual
violence as devastating weapons in a ruthless campaign
ofintimidation. As described in the Secretary-General's
report on sexual violence in conflict of March 2013
(S/2013/149), Syrian forces have committed rape,
torture and other inhumane acts that constitute war
crimes. Approximately 1.5 million Syrian refugees
have fled their homes. Thousands of women and
children who escaped sexual Violence in Syria now live
in constant fear of kidnapping, assault and rape inside
refugee camps.

As a family of nations, our responsibility to one
another stems from our common humanity. Our moral
imperative supersedes whatever politics, religion or
geography may divide us. There can be zero tolerance
for sexual violence. We must tirelessly persist until the
day when women are the agents of peace rather than the
victims of war.

