Mr. Aboud (Comoros) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my Government, first of all, I would like to
thank the delegation of Japan for convening this public
debate. I would also like to thank this morning's
speakers for their briefings and for having
demonstrated the importance and constant commitment
of the international community to the advancement of
women, to peace and to security throughout the world.

As the Security Council knows, since its
independence in 1975, my country has not experienced
a stable political situation. This has prevented the key
elements of Comorian society from becoming
dynamically involved in our country's progress and
development.

In such a context, Comorian women have not
been able to exercise any real political influence in
decision-making involving the future of the Comoros.
However, with the election of His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Abdallah Sambi, President of the Union of
the Comoros, my country has now begun a new
political era.

The success achieved in the national
reconciliation process begun by Comorians with the
immeasurable support of the entire international

community and all the development partners of the
Comoros offers Comorian women a real opportunity to
participate in decisions involving the future of the
Comoros, since my country has resolutely committed
itself to the path of democracy, the rule of law and
good governance.

In 2000, when the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), my country was caught up in
crisis. That prevented it from becoming truly involved
in the establishment of mechanisms to ensure the
advancement of the status of women throughout the
world. My country, the Union of the Comoros, is a
signatory of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women.

Gender equality is guaranteed by the constitution
of the Comoros. The Union of the Comoros also
subscribed to the Declaration of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, held in Beijing, and the African
Platform for Action and, at the regional level, has
ratified the Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and People's Rights. In so doing, it recognized and
guaranteed a broad range of political, civil, economic,
social and cultural rights for women. In spite of this
favourable political and legal framework, it is evident
that Comorian women continue to play a marginal role
in the decision-making process and are hardly visible
within decision-making bodies in both the public and
private sectors.

In December 2003, under the auspices of the
highest political and religious authorities of my
country and with technical support from a United
Nations team, my country organized a workshop on the
participation of women in decision-making, which
enabled us to explore appropriate strategies for
establishing a durable foundation for the effective
participation of Comorian women at all levels of
political decision-making.

In that regard, a project to support the
participation of women in decision-making enjoys the
financial support of the Japanese Women in
Development Fund and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), as well as technical
support from UNIFEM. That project is among the
Comorian Government's priorities with a view to
creating a favourable environment for the full
participation of all Comorians in our fight against
poverty, through enhancing awareness of the women's
rights, providing training to facilitate the access of
women to high-ranking positions and strengthening
existing structures and mechanisms for promoting
gender equality.

My country takes this opportunity to appeal to all
our partners and friends here to be so kind as to give
their support to that and similar projects, as they make
it possible to promote the status of Comorian women.
That would enable my country to contribute to the
success of resolution 1325 (2000), which opens up
wider horizons for the promotion of the status of
women throughout the world, in order to make our
world a secure world with equality for all, a world that
is truly committed to the recognition, defence and
promotion of human rights.

I cannot conclude without thanking the
development partners of the Comoros, who are helping
to strengthen its capacity for defending and promoting
women's rights, in particular the Government of Japan,
UNIFEM. and UNDP, for their financial support to this
important project, which will help to fulfil my
country's commitments to the international community
and its citizens to defend and promote the rights of all
Comorian men and women. Long live international
cooperation.

