The Secretary-General: I thank you, Foreign
Secretary Hague, for presiding over this meeting
during the United Kingdom's presidency of the Security
Council. I commend the leadership and efforts of the
United Kingdom in bringing key international support
and momentum to the crucial fight against conflict-
related sexual violence.

I also welcome the tireless work and advocacy of
Ms. Angelina Jolie. For years, she has been a voice
for the millions of people who are forced to flee their
homes due to conflict, and now for the many survivors
of wartime rape whose bodies have been used as
battlegrounds.

I am pleased, too, that we are joined by Jane Adong
Anywar, a lawyer and civil society activist who works
to bring justice to victims of sexual violence in conflict.
It is through the efforts of people like Ms. Anywar that
we can end impunity for this crime and ensure that
survivors get the legal redress they deserve.

Last month, I briefed the Council on my visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council will
recall that I visited the Heal Africa hospital in Goma,
where I met women and girls who had been raped and
maimed by armed groups on all sides of the conflict.
Many had a condition called traumatic fistula. In
plain terms, they had been torn inside. Experiencing
great pain and often unable to control bladder and
bowels, they are disabled and often shunned by society.
Hospitals such as Heal Africa in Goma, and Panzi in
Bukavu help rehabilitate such women. They mend their
wounds and provide skills that can give them self-
worth and a source of income; but they cannot protect
them. That is a job for the Congolese authorities and the
international community, in particular the Council. As
we drove into the hospital the streets were lined with
women. They were angry and they had a clear message:
no more impunity; no more war; give us peace. They
want us to hear and act on their appeal.

Sexual Violence occurs wherever conflict rages.
It has devastating effects on survivors and destroys
the social fabric of whole communities. While women
and girls suffer disproportionately from these vicious
crimes, men and boys are also targeted. Sexual violence
is a crime under international human rights law and a
threat to international peace and security. When used
as a weapon of war, it can significantly exacerbate
conflict and seriously hamper reconciliation.

The international community, through resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), has put in
place a solid framework for responding to conflict-
related sexual violence. The mechanisms established
enable us to carry out global advocacy through my
Special Representative, in collaboration with the United
Nations Action Network against Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which she leads. Today's draft resolution
sends yet another strong signal to perpetrators that
their acts will no longer be tolerated. They will be held
accountable.

Preventing sexual Violence in conflict is our joint
responsibility. It must be part of our work in many areas,
from peacekeeping and political missions to mediation,
ceasefire agreements, security sector reform, justice

sector reform and the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The United Nations system is committed to
"Delivering as One", to end the culture of impunity that
prevails in relation to sexual violence. On behalf of the
Action Network, UN-Women and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations have developed the first-ever
scenario-based training programme for peacekeepers.
A senior women's protection adviser will be deployed
shortly within the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan to join those already in place,
while others are soon to be deployed in the Central
African Republic, Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and Somalia.

The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict is an important tool
for strengthening national justice systems and legal
frameworks. It has provided technical advice to
authorities in the Central African Republic, Colombia,
Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea, Liberia, Somalia and South Sudan.UNICEF
and the United Nations Population Fund are leading the
United Nations system in coordinating the provision
of services for survivors. And the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
UN-Women are providing expertise for investigating
and documenting gender-based violence.

Along with leadership and access to justice,
understanding the extent of the problem is essential for
effectively protecting women and girls.

I have consistently emphasized the importance of
national ownership in preventing sexual Violence. I call
on all leaders at the highest political level to voice their
unequivocal support for our cause and to follow up with
deeds. That includes apprehending and prosecuting
perpetrators to deter further crimes. It means helping
survivors by improving medical, psychological, social
and judicial assistance. And it entails providing the
necessary resources to support the work of my Special
Representative and other mechanisms.

Those who hold power and influence have a special
duty to step forward and be part of a global coalition
of champions determined to break this evil. Sexual
violence is a vile, whenever and wherever it occurs. It
must be exposed and met with the anger and action that
it deserves.

I count on the Council's sustained leadership to
ensure that perpetrators are held accountable and
survivors receive justice and support.

