Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me to
express my delegation's satisfaction at seeing you
preside over this important meeting, Mr. Minister, and
at your having taken this initiative. We also wish to
thank, through you, the Secretary-General; Mrs.
Angela King, the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women; Mrs. Noleen Heyzer,
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM); and the delegation of
Namibia to the Security Council, led by Ambassador
Andjaba. We also thank all those who are present
today.

Peace is our first objective, and it is undeniably
here, in the Security Council, that peace must be
ensured. But allow me to add that without women, it is
difficult to ensure peace.

The women of Mali did not wait for the Republic
of Mali to achieve national sovereignty to become
involved in the prevention, settlement and management
of conflict. In traditional society, conflict resolution
was a collective effort, and the sacrifices that had to be
made were in the interest of the entire community.
Thus, women played a very important, endogenous
role.

In conflicts between communities, it is not
unusual for warring communities to resort to marriage
to restore peace. That makes it possible to seal a pact
of friendship, solidarity or cooperation.
Similarly, women have always been considered a
part of the entire community and of the family, and not
just the wife of a single individual. Allied societies
submit to the rules of marriage to avoid breaking the
social relationship established through the link of
marriage. Declared conflicts between communities
linked by marriages are generally quelled by the
intervention of women, through whom that matrimonial
linkage is established.

African women have always contributed to
facilitating and supporting as a matter of priority the
intermingling of tribes and the strengthening of unity
through the bonds of matrimony, as they are the
strongest links in the chain of solidarity, fraternity and
harmony. However, we must now recognize that
individualism, which was formerly proscribed, has
gained ground on these values to such an extent that it
has led to internal conflict. Africa has thus entered the
most troubling period of its history.

Mali has not been able to escape that scourge. In
1990 a Tuareg rebellion broke out in the north of the
country. As in other parts of the world, women do not
usually decide to go to war and they do not wage it.
Nevertheless, they suffer tremendously as a result of
wars and lose those dearest to them- fathers,
husbands and sons - and even lose their honour and
their dignity. Aware of this fact, the women of Mali
decided they would manage not only atrocities and
their devastating consequences, but that they would
also participate actively in preserving peace and
national unity. This conscious decision involved
women in the search for peaceful solutions to the crisis
that shook northern Mali and had various effects.

Those effects included appeals to mobilize for
peace; the development and implementation of a plan
of action and information campaign for peace; the
national mobilization of women around slogans calling
for peace and reconciliation; the mobilization of
resources for peace; the involvement of women in the
prevention and management of conflict and in the
consolidation of peace; humanitarian activities focused
on civilian victims; participation in preliminary
negotiations for the restoration of peace; and, finally,
participation in negotiating and finalizing the National
Peace Pact, which brought peace back to northern Mali.
With the restoration of peace, the women of Mali
continue their struggle, together with the rest of civil
society, to consolidate peace, and extend a hand to all
other women in countries undergoing crisis.

The women of Mali remain convinced that in
order to ensure the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations - which today have progressed from
traditional peacekeeping operations to
multidimensional activities in support of peace - the
principles of gender equity and equality must find a
place in all missions, at all levels, in order to guarantee
men and women the same role in every element of the
peace process: peacekeeping, reconciliation and peace-
building. In this connection, we firmly support the
Namibia Plan of Action on Mainstreaming a Gender
Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Support
Operations, which was adopted at Windhoek on 31
May 2000.

During the Security Council Summit of 7
September 2000, the President of the Republic of Mali,
who presided over the Council, welcomed the
Secretary-General's initiative by declaring that the
report submitted by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi is a
milestone in the process that will make the United
Nations "a truly credible force for peace." (S/PV4194, p. 20)

At a time when mankind must more than ever
before be the measure of the new millennium, and
when people expect the United Nations to be the
promoter and guarantor of a world of progress for
all - a world of peace, solidarity and sharing- the
Security Council must demonstrate a clear and
discernible capacity for action that both deters and
reassures. To achieve that capacity we must fully
integrate women as never before as partners and
beneficiaries in all aspects of a peace process:
peacekeeping, reconciliation and peace-building.

Mali is studying with great interest the
recommendations that have been made with regard to
the topic under consideration, and will actively and
positively participate in the negotiations on the relevant
draft resolution.

