Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Djibouti, vehemently condemns the coordinated
terrorist attacks that targeted places of worship and
hotels in Sri Lanka, leading the bloody massacre of
countless innocent victims. We reiterate our solidarity
with the people and Government of Sri Lanka.

(spoke in English)

Djibouti expresses its appreciation to the delegation
of Germany for convening this important discussion
on the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence, its
impact on international peace and security, and ways
to strengthen accountability. We are grateful for the
continued efforts and commitment of the Secretary-
General, as reflected in his annual report (S/2019/280)
on the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). We value the work
undertaken by the Office of the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict and the team
of experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence/
women protection advisers in their efforts to prevent
and address all forms of sexual Violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

A few days ago, we commemorated the twenty-
fifth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide with our
brothers and sisters in Rwanda. The prohibition of
rape is one of the oldest rules of war, having been
prohibited in the first modern code of war, the Lieber
Code of 1863 and the 1949 Geneva Conventions. It
was only in September 1998, in the case of Jean-Paul
Akayesu before the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, that a tribunal handed down a conviction for
rape as a crime against humanity. The Tribunal stated
unequivocally that rape and sexual violence constituted
one ofthe worst ways ofharming the victim as he or she
suffered both bodily and mental harm.

Building on that jurisprudence, the development of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
was seen by many as a significant milestone in the
prosecution of conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence. Article 8 of the Rome Statute includes rape,
sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy,
enforced sterilization or any other form of sexual
violence as war crimes in cases of both international
and non-international armed conflict.

Many other speakers, including the remarkably
brave 2018 Nobel Peace Prize laureates Ms. Nadia
Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege Mukengere, continue
to bring conflict-related sexual violence and gender-
based violence to the world's attention. Djibouti thanks
them for their presence here with us today and for
their contributions.

Despite the progress made, sexual and gender-
based violence continue in conflicts today. It remains
uniquely concealed and distinctively difficult to
prosecute. I would like to focus on the importance
of addressing the silence around such crimes. As Dr.
Mukwege has explained, staying silent about sexual
violence has granted impunity to the perpetrators and
increased its proliferation. "What is keeping rape in our
society is silence. The silence is really a strong tool of
rapists, so they can go on destroying girls and women,"
he said. "If she stays in silence, she can be raped again
and again and she cannot protect others."

The United Nations and its Members must
endeavour to help survivors report their experiences
concerning their conflict-related sexual and gender-
based violence and thereby increase accountability.
We should all seek to reduce the stigma around sexual
and gender-based violence. We should find creative
ways to raise awareness, including through the use of
community radio, theatre and community and religious
leaders. We need long-term communal strategies to
change underlying behavioural norms that somehow do
not condemn sexual and gender-based violence as the
atrocious crimes they are.

The United Nations should help community-based
first responders to better document sexual and gender-
based violence. Health-care providers play a critical role
in providing urgent care and immediate clinical care
to survivors. In addition to that moral imperative, they
could help hold perpetrators accountable. It has been
convincingly demonstrated that victims who report
rape and the medical providers who document their
accounts support the justice process through forensic
medical examinations and by recording findings in
any final medical report, collecting evidence from
a survivor's body and testifying in court. Providing
adequate training in those areas is therefore critical.

In conclusion, Djibouti supports the establishment
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
to address rape and other sexual crimes in their
investigations of human rights violations in war zones.

