Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): We thank the United
Kingdom for this opportunity to speak on human
trafficking in conflict and on modern slavery. The
prohibition of slavery is one of the very rare norms of
international law applicable at all times in all places
to all actors. States are under legal obligation to
criminalize, investigate, prosecute and punish slavery
wherever it occurs. Over 90 per cent of countries have
legislation in place criminalizing human trafficking.
Yet estimates suggest that 46 million people have fallen
victim to modern slavery and human trafficking, and
convictions for those crimes amount to a mere fraction
of the total number of perpetrators. The impunity gap
is glaring, in spite of the strong universal legal norm.

Resolution 2331 (2016) on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations, adopted last December, was the
first-ever Council resolution on the issue. It identified
a correlation between human trafficking, sexual
Violence, armed conflict, terrorism and transnational
organized crime. It also highlighted the gender-specific
implications of human trafficking in conflict.

Over 70 per cent of trafficking victims are
women and girls. This is why it is particularly
important to explore the gender dimensions of modern
slavery -which was the main topic of a ministerial-level
side event organized jointly by the United Kingdom,
Nigeria and Liechtenstein this past Monday. We
hope to take from that event concrete actions that the
international community can implement in its efforts
to end and prevent slavery, particularly as it pertains to
female victims.

Last June, Liechtenstein organized a two-day
workshop, together with the United Kingdom Mission
and the United Nations University, on ways the Security
Council can address and tackle human trafficking in
conflict. The resulting report identified 10 ideas for
action on the part of the Security Council, some of
which were reflected in both the report of the Secretary-
General on trafficking in persons (S/2016/949) and
resolution 2331 (2016).

One of the central conclusions was the need for
a paradigm shift, meaning recognition that national
criminal justice responses may need to be supported by
other forms of Security Council leverage - normative,
financial and technological - and the need for
innovative approaches in the fight against modern
slavery. Businesses using forced labour currently
generate estimated annual profits of $150 billion. One
obvious innovative approach is to involve financial
institutions in detecting and disrupting financial
flows associated with human trafficking 4 to "follow
the money".

To further explore that avenue, we are organizing a
two-day workshop with the United Nations University
at the end of the month. It will bring together leaders
from the financial sector, including financial regulators,
investigators and prosecutors, and representatives of
Member States and of civil society. We will discuss
the nature of the financial sector's exposure to
modern slavery, human trafficking and forced labour,
risks associated with that exposure and measures the
financial sector can take to combat those crimes, as well
as the role of different actors in protecting the financial
sector against involvement in modern slavery, human
trafficking and forced labour. The outcome of the
workshop will be a limited set of concrete, actionable
ideas and recommendations to assist the financial
sector, regulators and other stakeholders in the fight
against modern slavery and human trafficking.

While the Council has underscored that acts or
offences associated with human trafficking in conflict
may constitute war crimes, it has failed to acknowledge
that they may also amount to crimes against humanity.
The full potential of international criminal justice
needs to be exhausted if we are to be serious about
eradicating slavery.

In her briefing before the Security Council in
November 2016 (see S/PV.7806), International Criminal
Court Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda indicated that her
Office would probe the trafficking of migrants out of
Libya for evidence of war crimes and/or crimes against
humanity. Hundreds of thousands of migrants are being
smuggled from Libya into Europe. The International
Organization for Migration estimates that up to 76 per
cent of them have fallen victim to practices amounting
to human trafficking. Women and children usually bear
the brunt of those crimes. We look forward to receiving
the results of that probe and hope it will provide us
with a better understanding of how and when human
trafficking may amount to atrocity crimes and ways we
can use the relevant tools available to us.

The upcoming report by the Secretary-General
is an opportunity to broaden the approach to both
the issue itself and its associated terminology. It is a
cross-cutting issue relevant to all of the pillars of the
United Nations and an integral part of the commitments
made by Member States, such as the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We hope that the Council
will remain seized of this important issue, and we look
forward to presenting the results from our efforts to
combat modern slavery and human trafficking at the
next open debate on the matter.

