Mr. Kim Hyun Chong (Republic of Korea): At
the outset, I wish to join previous speakers in
expressing my sincere gratitude to you, Mr. President,
for holding this open debate on women and peace and
security.

Over the seven years since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women,
peace and security, much has been achieved in terms of
implementation by Member States, civil society and
the United Nations system. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2007/567) is a compilation of the reports on
progress made by each entity. It notes, for example, the
adoption by five entities of action plans for gender
mainstreaming in their work on conflict prevention, the
implementation of early-warning mechanisms by seven
entities and the appointment of gender advisers in
eleven peacekeeping missions.

Unfortunately, however, these efforts were rather
fragmented and incoherent. So far, the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) is far from sufficient.
Women continue to be excluded from or marginalized
in peacemaking and peacebuilding processes. There
has been some integration of gender perspectives, but it
has not been systematic, nor has it adequately
encompassed all facets of the process, including
conflict prevention, early warning, peacekeeping
operations, humanitarian responses, post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation.

Most disturbing to the Republic of Korea is the
fact that sexual and gender-based violence in armed
conflict is growing in many places. My delegation is
particularly appalled by occurrences of systematic rape
and sexual violence.

Paragraph 10 of the resolution

"Calls on all parties to armed conflict to take
special measures to protect women and girls from
gender-based violence, particularly rape and other
forms of sexual abuse, and all other forms of
violence in situations of armed conflict."
Paragraph 11 emphasizes the responsibility of all
States to put an end to impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity, and
war crimes, including those relating to sexual and other
violence against women and girls.

The brutal facts of sexual violence against
women and girls in many armed conflicts make it
horribly clear that the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) has fallen far short of its intended aims.

My delegation believes that this poor
implementation is not the fault of the Secretary-
General or of the United Nations entities; rather, it is
the Security Council's lack of accountability and the
failure to implement the resolution.

The Secretary-General's report also identifies as
key challenges fragmentation and insufficient
institutional capacity for oversight and accountability
for system performance. The report explains that the
current action plan was not established as a tool for
monitoring, evaluation and accountability, and its
revised action plan attempts to fill that gap. While we
appreciate this effort to improve reporting, we do not
believe it is the solution to the greater problem.

What we most urgently need is a dedicated and
effective Security Council mechanism for overall
integration and implementation of the resolution in the
Council's work. This mechanism would bear the
responsibility to provide directives and to oversee,
monitor and evaluate such implementation. Secondly,
the Security Council urgently needs to address the
serious situation of the sexual violation of women and
girls.

It is the view of the Republic of Korea that, in
implementing the resolution, we should consider
regional approaches, including the utilization of
existing regional arrangements. Effective regional
entities could provide added value through their
established networks, solidarity, communication and
accessibility. However, we must keep in mind that the
ultimate accountability lies with the Security Council,
not with regional entities. Therefore, regional entities
should play a complementary role, not act as
substitutes. Nevertheless, as long as the participation of
regional entities is making a substantial contribution to
implementation, the regional approach will remain a
valid one.

In addition, my country hopes that the dialogue
for system-wide coherence regarding the gender
architecture will be finalized as soon as possible to
expedite a coherent response from the United Nations
system across the board for women's empowerment.

My delegation looks forward to a concrete
outcome from today's discussion. Through substantive
improvements in the implementation mechanism and
the strong will of the Security Council to end grave
sexual violence in armed conflict, we can make real
progress in implementation and reconfirm the
accountability of the Security Council. The Republic of
Korea is fully committed to ensuring the realization of
the United Nations promise to women in armed
conflicts.

