Mr. Dauth (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak today. It would be remiss
of me not to begin, Sir, without acknowledging your
personal commitment and energy in carrying this
debate forward. We also thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno and Amy Smythe for their very
helpful presentations this morning. At the risk of
annoying the interpreters, I shall summarize my
prepared remarks to make them even briefer than they
were, in the interest of moving things along this
afternoon. But I cannot leave out the first paragraph,
which notes that this is the third anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and that we,
Australia, are proud to reaffirm our commitment to that
resolution.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was the first resolution
addressing gender issues to be passed by the Security
Council. A great deal has been accomplished since
then, but a great deal more needs to be done. Not least,
of course, because women and girls remain
overwhelmingly the main victims of armed conflict,
often victims in the most horrific of ways.

Women continue to be significantly under-
represented in peace-building, peacekeeping and post-
conflict reconciliation and reconstruction, despite the
acknowledgement by resolution 1325 (2000) of their
importance in those areas. So much still needs to be
done.

We have some very relevant experience in the
Pacific region which bears attention at the United
Nations and by Member States more generally. In
particular, we have built issues of the impact of conflict
on women and children into our peace, conflict and
development policy, which is now an integral part of
our aid policy.

We have had experience, in both the Solomon
Islands and Bougainville, of drawing particularly on
the contribution which women in both of those conflict
areas have been able to make. In particular it is the
case in the Solomon Islands and Bougainville that
women have made a more than equal contribution
toward the achievement of peace.

I am pleased to note that we have a senior
Australian policewoman as the current United Nations
Police Commissioner in East Timor. Police
Commissioner Sandra Peisly is the only woman
holding such a position in an operation of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). We
make a concerted effort to include women
peacekeepers in our peacekeeping contributions around
the world.

We remain committed to the sustainable
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
commend the first steps that have been taken towards
that objective, including through the appointment of a
Gender Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, as others have noted, and the development
of gender action plans in the Department for
Disarmament Affairs and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We note also
that DPKO is developing a field guide to gender
mainstreaming and has issued a gender and
peacekeeping training manual. In all of this,
Jean-Marie Guehenno deserves commendation for his
leadership.

But, as I have already said, much more needs to
be done. Without further concrete action, resolution
1325 (2000) will only remain a set of aspirational
standards. In that context there are some questions
which many others have asked but which, I think,
DPKO and the Secretariat more generally need
constantly to address. What are the hurdles in
achieving the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in current peacekeeping operations? Has the
Secretariat put into place any institutional mechanisms
to monitor progress made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000)? What efforts are being made to
ensure that the recommendations in resolution 1325
(2000) are mainstreamed into the work programmes of
all United Nations agencies?

The responsibility for implementing resolution
1325 (2000) rests not only with the Secretariat.
Member States - and, in particular, Council
members - also have important responsibilities, not
least in ensuring that mandates take full account of
gender perspectives. We all now need to focus on
practical steps to give effect to resolution 1325 (2000).
Australia stands ready to do its part.

