The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the observer of the Holy See.

Reverend Monsignor Grech (Holy See): My
delegation wishes to express its gratitude for Jordan's
presidency of the Security Council this month and for
this open debate on sexual violence in armed conflict.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on conflict-related sexual Violence
(S/2015/203), and commend the work of civil society
representatives on this issue.

Women are not spared any of the brutal
consequences of war, and are additionally subject to
uniquely degrading and traumatizing attacks and long-
term consequences. It is only just and reasonable that
their voices should be present and influential in the
work of preventing and resolving violence and war.

It is well documented that sexual violence of many
kinds accompanies modern warfare. We all know the
awful litany. Women are raped and trafficked, forced into
prostitution to earn a living, and terrorized individually
and in their roles as protectors of their children and
other vulnerable family members. All violence against
human life is terrible, but sexual Violence is designed
to debase, dehumanize and demoralize in a unique
way. The consequences are profound and long-lasting,
physical as well as psychological. The hatred and
humiliation these crimes can provoke are deep and
surely impede in powerful ways the achievement of the
goals of peace and security for which this institution
was created.

The recent year has been marked by new and
ongoing atrocities involving sexual violence in various
conflicts and by groups such as Boko Haram and the
so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. Some are
also attacks upon women and girls purely because of
the faith they profess. Although this is of very serious
concern today for Christians, surely it is a matter
where our shared human nature, across all religions
and cultures, cries out for the common commitment
of members of all faiths and Governments to strongly
condemning and confronting such heinous acts and to
stepping forward to protect those threatened.

It seems that, in the past several years, there has
emerged a greater international consciousness of the
scourge of human trafficking, and even increased
response. It is to be hoped that there will be an ever
greater appreciation ofwhat Pope Francis has called the
trauma, affecting the body and spirit, of rape as a tool
of war. To adapt an observation made by His Holiness,
a two-point drop in the stock market is front-page news,
while the violation of hundreds or even thousands of
women may go unreported.

My delegation supports those processes identified
in successive reports issued by the Secretary-General
as essential for ensuring justice to women assaulted
in conflict, effective investigation and documentation,
consistent and rigorous prosecution, and ongoing
investigation and responsibility regarding the root
causes of sexual and other violence in armed conflict.
We support efforts to provide adequate legal, medical
and social services to the particular women affected,
to witnesses and survivors, and to their family
members. Because of the Catholic Church's permanent
local presence in the areas of the world most affected
by disasters, a network of Catholic institutions and
agencies responds rapidly and effectively to address the
consequence of violence in armed conflict.

It is always distressing, however, to see that some
are still promoting the abortion of unborn children as
part of the treatment or response to attacks on their
mothers. This contradicts the peace and security
mission of the United Nations, and proposes meeting
violence with more violence.

It has been observed many times on this organ,
and it is true, that women are not only victims but also
the necessary agents of and contributors to the work
of preventing and resolving conflicts. Without their
contributions, Governments, negotiators and civil
society groups can neither understand the problems nor
propose effective solutions. Moreover, it is important to
continue in every Member State the steady and patient
work of achieving structural justice for women in every
sector of society. A proper Vision of women's roles in
society and the integration of women into every social
sector are crucial aspects of violence prevention.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.


