Mr. Scotti (Italy): First of all, allow me to fully
align myself with the statement that will be delivered
by Slovenia in its capacity as President of the European
Union.

The issues that we are addressing today -
women and peace and security - deserve the
international community's utmost attention and
unequivocal support. I will therefore begin by stressing
Italy's commitment to the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which
provides a comprehensive framework for addressing
every aspect of the relationship between women and
peace and security. It recognizes a key concept that
should guide all of our actions in this field: women
cannot be protected unless their participation at the
decision-making level in all peace and reconciliation
processes is ensured. At the same time, the protection
of women from the violence of war is a necessary step
towards empowering them to participate in the
rebuilding of their societies.

Our success in implementing resolution 1325
(2000) must be judged on the basis of the
improvements that we have already secured relating to
the status of women. In our opinion, only one
conclusion can be drawn: not enough has been done.
Hence our conviction that the time has come to identify
achievable and specific goals, without losing sight of
the general picture.

From this perspective, countering the
unspeakable horrors resulting from the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war is a clear priority. I am
therefore particularly grateful to the Government of the
United States of America and to you, Madam
President, for having organized today's open debate
and for having submitted the draft resolution that will
be adopted later and that Italy is honoured to
co-sponsor.

The situation before us is appalling: 70 per cent
of the casualties in recent conflicts have been civilians
or non-combatants - most of them women and
children. Women's bodies have been increasingly
targeted during conflicts. Evidence shows that in many
cases this represents a deliberate method of warfare
and, sadly, a particularly devastating one. Rape and
sexual violence are used to achieve political and
military aims; to dominate, terrify and humiliate
opponents; and to uproot communities and ethnic
groups, thus contributing to the collapse of entire
societies for generations to come.

Concrete information and precise evidence is,
unfortunately, hard to come by, since the victims are
often unreasonably and unacceptably stigmatized and
too traumatized to come forward and denounce the
violence to which they have been subjected.
Nevertheless, what we do know is truly appalling:
millions of women and girls have been raped, gang-
raped, sexually tortured and abused, often in
particularly atrocious ways.

From that perspective, the link between sexual
violence and the maintenance of peace and security
becomes evident; it demands immediate action by the
international community and is therefore very much
the business of the Council. All mandates for United
Nations missions should ensure that whenever and
wherever the United Nations is in the field - be it in
peacekeeping or humanitarian operations - its staff is
trained to prevent, recognize and respond to sexual
violence. A collection and analysis of existing best
practices could be an important exercise, leading,
hopefully, to the formulation of a United Nations
doctrine that sets training standards for all military and
police personnel deployed by the Organization.
The Council's demand in today's draft resolution
is clear: all parties to armed conflict must immediately
cease all acts of sexual violence and take special
measures to protect women and girls. The Council will
have to follow up its demands by monitoring the
parties' implementation of those obligations.
Accountability is a key element. We have to identify
the parties that continue to use sexual violence as a
tactic of war, and we must build on the example set by
resolution 1807 (2008).

We therefore need an efficient system to gather
accurate information. We hope that the report requested
in the draft resolution will meet this need. We also
need to fight impunity for such acts, defined as a crime
against humanity and a war crime by the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. We must devote
more time and resources to strengthening the activities
of national and international tribunals, including in
post-conflict situations, to building a gender-sensitive
transitional justice system and a gender-sensitive
security sector.

In this regard, I am very pleased to announce that
Italy is in the process of disbursing a specific
contribution of €l million to fund a United Nations
Development Fund for Women programme on
resolution 1325 (2000) in Liberia, in addition to
several other initiatives that it has financed in recent
years.

Today's resolution will be a major step forward,
much like resolution 1325 (2000) was eight years ago.
The Security Council has the moral and legal
responsibility to send a clear message to the
international community that it is determined to put an
end to this scourge; to the perpetrators of crimes
against women that they will no longer go unpunished;
and to women that they will no longer be the victims of
armed conflict, but rather the main agents of life and
peace in their societies.

