Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the Uruguayan presidency
of the Security Council for convening today's open
debate on sexual violence in conflict as a tactic of war
and terrorism, which is indeed a most pressing issue.
I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, Under-Secretary-General Adama
Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf for their very comprehensive
presentations this morning.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement earlier
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union, and I would like to add some comments in my
national capacity.

We welcome the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2017/249), which has given us very important
information on the implementation of the Council's
resolutions on conflict-related sexual violence and
its substantial recommendations for dealing with that
scourge. Almost 17 years ago, the Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, but despite all our efforts and achievements
so far, I think we all agree that much remains to be
done. Portugal considers it to be extremely important
to ensure that the Security Council continues to address
concerns relating to the agenda on women and peace
and security, which is a critical yet under-utilized tool
for preventing conflict and shaping more effective
responses to today's complex crises.

As discussed in the Secretary-General's report, in
2016 sexual violence, including widespread incidents
of rape, continued to be employed as a tactic of war.
That is intolerable. The report also illustrates the nexus
that exists between trafficking in persons and conflict-
related sexual violence, which is especially worrying
where it relates to the cases of women and girls who
have been ostracized after being released from violent
extremist groups and have subsequently fallen victims
to sex trafficking.

Portugal fully agrees with the View of the Secretary-
General that more must be done to prevent sexual
violence in conflict. Moreover, we need to ensure
the following: victims of violence, including sexual
violence, should be able to effectively enjoy the right
to protection and reparation; the perpetrators should
be punished; and support for community-mobilization
campaigns should be designed to help shift the stigma
of sexual violence from the victims to the perpetrators.
We would like once again to encourage States and
international organizations to develop action plans for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and to
include therein measures to address specifically sexual
violence in conflict.

Portugal adopted its first national action plan in
2009. A second one, currently in force, was adopted
in 2014. It includes several measures addressing the
scourge of sexual violence in conflict, notably training
programmes on gender equality and violence against
women and young women, including sexual and
gender-based violence and trafficking in human beings,
for executive and technical staff in the justice sector
and for members of the armed forces and the security
forces; and the same programmes are also in place for
judicial personnel and members of the armed forces and
security forces assigned to international missions for
the promotion and maintenance of peace and security.

We must also to take into account the essential
role played by civil-society organizations, which
often complement the work done by military, security
and civilian personnel in conflict and post-conflict
settings and in emergency situations. They often play
a crucial role in preventing and reporting crimes and
in alerting the international community to such crimes,
in restoring the internal order of the States and may
also be crucial in supporting the reconstruction of
countries and helping the population. Working in close
collaboration with those organizations is therefore
indispensable, in our view, to enhance the results we
are seeking to achieve.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the attention of
the Council to the potential of the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security, which supports the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008). It is a most relevant initiative
by Spain, which Portugal fully supports. Portugal is
also a proud member of that group.

