Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like first to thank the Russian presidency for having
organized this annual debate on the topic of women
and peace and security, which the Security Council and
the international community continue to attach major
importance, in accordance with its primary mission of
conflict prevention and resolution.

The critical and multidimensional nature of this
issue were both clearly evident in the briefings we
have heard this morning. I warmly thank the briefers,
His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women; and Ms. Rita Lopidia, Executive Director
of the EVE Organization for Women Development.

The Senegalese delegation also aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, to which Senegal belongs.

Insecurity in all its forms - social, political,
economic and environmental - is an impediment to
gender equality and to the empowerment of women.
Whenever and wherever there is insecurity, women and
girls are those primarily affected. However, as former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan said, "women, who
know the price of conflict so well, are also often better
equipped than men to prevent or resolve it".

But the specific life experiences of women in
conflict, as well as their skills, are not sufficiently
taken into account in reconciliation, reconstruction
and peacebuilding processes, precisely because women
and girls are often kept away from decision-making
bodies. Last year, therefore, when we reviewed the
15 years since the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), the Security Council recognized the urgent
need to effectively implement all its provisions at the
international, regional, subregional and national levels.

As is known, Senegal was among the earliest
African countries to enact legal standards for absolute
parity between men and women for all its elected
and semi-elected posts. At the same time, we have
pushed for the adoption by the African Union of the
same full gender parity within the governing bodies
of the African Union Commission. Senegal is also the
first African country to have successfully tested the
powerful mechanism of the "situation room", the crisis-
management tool through which women deploy all their
energy, all their commitment and their entire sense of
responsibility in order to ensure that election processes
are as free, transparent and peaceful as possible.
Senegal has also taken the innovative approach of
translating resolution 1325 (2000) into the main popular
languages of Senegal in order to facilitate ownership of
its contents by the population and to promote capacity-
building for women, for therein lies the success of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

On another level, in Senegal, a sectoral strategy
implemented by the Ministries of Defence and Security
has led to the institutionalization of the gender approach
in actions taken by the Senegalese defence and security
forces. Senegal has also adopted the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy on sexual or gender-based
violence, particularly in peacekeeping operations.
Furthermore, Senegalese civil society organizations
are very active when it comes to advocating for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), primarily by
providing support for capacity-building for women and
girls.

Senegal has expressed its national commitment in
favour of resolution 1325 (2000) at the West African
subregional level, at the African continental level and
at the international level. With respect to the Economic
Community ofWest African States (ECOWAS), Senegal
has participated actively in the planning, organization
and monitoring of periodic regional conferences where
experiences with the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) are shared. At the first such conference,
organized in September 2010 in Dakar, the ECOWAS
Regional Action Plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted.

It was pursuant to this regional action plan that
Senegal drew up its own national action plan for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), which revolves
around three pillars. The first pillar is prevention,
which involves setting up monitoring structures to
better detect and fight against all forms of violence
against women. The second pillar is participation,
favouring the involvement of women in the conflict-
prevention, management and resolution mechanisms
and in traditional governance bodies. The third pillar
is assistance and restructuring, which are primarily
aimed at protecting the physical and mental health of
women, their economic empowerment, specific support
for women from vulnerable groups, and the launching
of programmes and structures that take into account
the specific needs of women in conflict and post-
conflict phases.

It is in this spirit that many efforts are currently
being made in Africa, where the commitment ofregional
organizations clearly shows that peace is inextricably
linked with gender equality. In this respect, we welcome
regular holding of consultative meetings among the
member States of the African Union to assess regional
mechanisms for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The most recent of these meetings was held
in Addis Ababa in December 2015 at the initiative of
Mrs. Bineta Diop, African Union Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security, who is also the person
who conceived, hosted and popularized the situation
room I referred to earlier. We welcome her leadership
and tireless efforts to guarantee the safety of women
and children in countries affected by conflict in Africa.

Senegal also actively participates in other regional
initiatives such as the intergenerational dialogues
on peace and security involving women and girls.
It is along the same lines that my country joined the
wonderful Spanish initiative that my colleague Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi has so eloquently spoken about,
namely, the establishment of the national focal point
network for women, peace and security. The first
meeting of that network took place on 23 September,
with the participation of Senegal.

Despite these commendable efforts, much remains
to be done because it is very clear that women and girls
continue to suffer disproportionately in conflict zones
and during conflict periods around the world. That is
why, in the context of emerging challenges in terms
of peace and security, it is urgent to invest further in
national early-warning and rapid-response mechanisms
in order to ensure the full participation women
and civil-society organizations in peace processes.
Similarly, we have to think about strengthening
dialogue between women and national and regional
authorities on women's rights and the involvement of
women in peace and security processes. Accordingly,
we must further encourage the holding of regional
events on conflict before, during and after elections. It
is also crucial to promote education focused on peace
in order to create a true culture of peace in all States,
while further sensitizing defence and security forces,
legal practitioners and religious and traditional leaders
on all the implications of resolution 1325 (2000).

In conclusion, I would like to point out that
improving women's access to justice, the fight
against impunity and the effective empowerment of
women remain priority objectives in terms of the full
implementation of international, regional and national
instruments to promote and protect women's rights, as
resolution 1325 (2000) calls on us to do.

Last year, at the global leaders' summit meeting
presided over by the Chinese President here in New
York, at which Senegalese President Macky Sall
participated, strong and encouraging commitments
were made in favour of the full participation and better
representation of women at all levels. The effort to
fulfil these commitments will be the price we have to
pay to achieve peaceful and inclusive societies by 2030.

