Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by sincerely thanking the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their valuable input.

In its various resolutions on women and peace
and security, the Security Council has recognized the
need to address the threats to the security of women
and to protect them in conflict situations. It has also
reaffirmed that women's empowerment is critical
in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and post-
conflict situations, as well as broader efforts to maintain
international peace and security.

The threats to the security of women and the need
for their empowerment are the most urgent and essential
demands in our volatile region, the Middle East, where
women are among the main victims. The major threats
to the security of women in our neighbourhood are
foreign occupation, military invasion and terrorism,
all of which infringe on and threaten women's rights
and lives.

Foreign occupation is the most severe threat to
the security of women and girls in Palestine. It is even
more horrifying in the Gaza Strip, where women and
their children are the main victims of a decades-long,
inhumane and illegal blockade. Moreover, the long-term
impacts of foreign occupation on Palestinian women in
neighbouring countries, where they have suffered for
decades and are still waiting to return to their ancestral
land, should not be overlooked or underestimated.
Foreign invasion has had the same impact on women
in Syria and certain other countries of the region, where
their situation is exacerbated by the effects of terrorist
activities. In such situations, air strikes, in particular
on residential areas, hospitals, schools and even
wedding ceremonies, mostly affect the lives of women.
We share the view that women must be at the forefront
of development, peace and security. However, in such
an unstable region as the Middle East, there is little
room for women's empowerment and development. In
some societies, what women and girls look for first and
foremost is to remain alive; empowerment remains a
secondary priority to them.

Stopping the suffering of women, preventing
their marginalization and protecting their lives can
create conditions conducive to the empowerment of
women and enhance their role in promoting a lasting
peace in the Middle East. As a victim of aggression,
foreign military invasion and terrorism, we attach great
importance to the role that women can play in building
a secure, stable and prosperous society.

The outstanding role of women in Iran is
incontestable; for instance, they are active participants
in political life and elections as both candidates
and voters. Similarly, the number of women who study
medicine and science in Iran now surpasses that of men.
Such achievements are being made despite extremely
hostile United States policies and illegal sanctions,
which make no distinction between men and women,
and violate the basic human rights of both, ultimately
undermining the constructive role that Iranian women
can play.

In conclusion, I stress that promoting the role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution and in
post-conflict situations is not an option, but a necessity.
The realization of this noble objective is a collective
responsibility, and we stand ready to contribute to any
genuine international effort to achieve that end.

