Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
aligns itself with the statement that will be made on
behalf of the European Union.

Implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
remains imperfect. Sexual violence continues at an
intolerable level, and only 7 per cent of peace
negotiating teams are women. Hence, a great deal
remains to be done. This tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) should mark the
start of fresh efforts by the international community.

France is fully playing its role in these efforts, as
reflected in its adoption of a national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
national action plan sets out four strategic goals:
protecting women from violence and mobilizing efforts
to ensure respect for their basic rights; ensuring the
participation of women in the management of conflict
and post-conflict situations by promoting the direct
participation of women in peacekeeping missions and
supporting civil society efforts; increasing awareness
of women's rights through training programmes; and
developing political and diplomatic action to promote
the women and peace and security agenda, particularly
in the European Union and in the Security Council.

France was instrumental in recasting operational
documents of the European Security and Defence
Policy to include protection of women in conflict
situations and promotion of their role with respect to
emerging from crisis. In that regard, France believes
that the United Nations should in the future focus on
three priorities: combating sexual violence; employing
indicators to monitor implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) by the United Nations system; and
increasing the contribution of women to conflict
resolution.

With respect to combating sexual violence,
France supports the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and calls for accelerated
appointment of women's protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions. We look forward to specific
proposals in the next report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008),
which is due in December.

In more general terms, France will continue its
efforts to integrate into peacekeeping operations the
approach recommended in resolution 1325 (2000) and
to convince parties to conflict themselves to do the
same in their peace processes.

The fight against impunity is integral to our
approach. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
following the mass rapes that took place in Walikale
last summer, we call upon the Council to remain
vigilant in monitoring compliance with the
recommendations set out its presidential statement of
17 September (S/PRST/2010/l7) with a view to
punishing the perpetrators and to preventing such
horrors from happening again.

Also, indicators to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) are a useful tool for Member
States and the United Nations system in monitoring
progress and, when necessary, in noting setbacks. They
can also provide early warning, making it possible to
anticipate crises and prevent them from degenerating
into armed conflict. We call on the Secretary-General
to operationalize these indicators as quickly as
possible. This would help improve the monitoring of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

In that regard, let me once again draw attention to
the situation in Guinea, where the announced
postponement of the presidential election and the
incidents of recent days are cause for concern,
including as regards women if we bear in mind what
happened during the massacre of 28 September 2009
and the ensuing days.

Finally, with respect to the participation of
women in conflict resolution, France welcomes the
progress that has been made. This has been outlined by
Ms. Bachelet and Mr. Le Roy, and I shall not return to
it now.

In closing, I commend the establishment of
UN Women and the appointment of Ms. Bachelet as its
Executive Director. Beyond the contribution of the
Security Council, the entire United Nations system
needs to intensify its action to free women from the
scourge of war.

