Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate and for the concept paper contained in document
S/2015/32. I would also like to express our appreciation
to the representatives ofthe Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) and civil society for their
insightful contribution to our discussions.

The protection of civilians is a human, legal and
political imperative and requires concerted efforts to
ensure that all actors respect this responsibility. We
cannot but agree with the view that greater compliance
with international humanitarian law is an indispensable
prerequisite for improving the situation of victims of
armed conflict. In that regard, we appreciate the joint
initiative of Switzerland and the ICRC on strengthening
compliance with international humanitarian law
in preparation for the thirty-second International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent.

The challenges to the protection of civilians are
enormous. The main obstacle relates primarily to
the frequent failure of parties to conflict to comply
with their obligations under existing legal rules. It is
imperative that all parties to conflict abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law.

Inaction and the neglect of civilian suffering, along
with the prevailing atmosphere of impunity and lack
of accountability, are among the most challenging
problems giving rise to a need to act. Ending impunity
is essential for the purpose not only of identifying
responsibility among parties to a conflict and individual
perpetrators, but also of ensuring sustainable peace,
truth, reconciliation, the rights and interests of victims
and the well-being of society at large.

Intentional targeting has become a common feature
of conflicts in many parts of the world. It uniquely and
disproportionately affects women and girls and does
not leave much room for doubting the danger of the
phenomenon and the necessity of timely action.

Particular consideration must be given to the
protection of civilians forced to leave their homes as
a result of armed conflict. My country supports the
continuing efforts being made to raise awareness of
the problem of internal displacement and the right of
return.

Another alarming manifestation of violations
against civilian populations is the contesting ofthe status
of civilians per se and the principle of protection despite
persistent evidence that persons in question belong to
the category of non-combatant. Hostage-taking, illegal
detention and prosecution constitute grave breaches
of the international humanitarian law. This issue is of
a paramount importance to my country, Azerbaijan,
which continues to suffer from Armenian aggression
and military occupation that inherently involve a wide
range violations of the rights of Azerbaij ani populations
for the last two decades.

The most recent examples of such violations are
the cases of Messrs. Hasan Hasanov, Shakhbaz Guliyev
and Dilgam Askarov. While visiting the graves of their
parents buried in the occupied region of Kalbajar,
Mssrs. Guliyev and Askarov were taken hostage and are
facing fabricated criminal charges. Mr. Hasanov was
killed on 11 July 2014. It was not before three months
had elapsed, on 2 October 2014, that Mr. Hasanov's
body was returned from the Armenian side through the
mediation of the ICRC.

With regard to the two captured civilians,
Messrs. Guliyev and Askarov, who are being required
by the Armenians to answer for false and unfounded
accusations as some kind of diversion, it is pertinent to
clarify that these civilians were captured on their own
territory, that is, within the internationally recognized
borders of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Except the
conditions specified by the laws of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, no one - and I emphasize, no one - has
the right to impose restrictions on or prohibit the free
movement within the territory of the Republic of
Azerbaijan. Needless to say, putting Messrs. Guliyev
and Askarov through illegal court proceedings,
sentencing Mr. Askarov to life imprisonment and
Mr. Guliyev to 22 years in prison, and subsequently
forcing them to appeal, is null and void.
Through you, Mr. President, I call on all relevant
international human rights and humanitarian actors to
intervene and take the lead in preventing those persons
from being subject to illegal detention, prosecution and
incarceration while it is not too late and they still are
alive. In that regard, we appreciate those countries that
have rejected the so-called court and its verdict. We
commend the work of the ICRC and its dedicated staff
and look forward to their continued engagement in the
release of our civilians.

To conclude, I would like once again to commend
the initiative of the Chilean presidency to convene this
very important open debate and advance the theme of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict within the
work of the Council.

