Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I should like to thank the
Secretary General and his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura, for their
insightful briefings, and commend the United Nations
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict for their valuable work.

We welcome the increased attention being paid to
the issue of women and peace and security in conflict
and post-conflict situations by the Security Council
and beyond. However, stronger efforts are needed

to address the ongoing systematic and widespread
violations. Women and girls continue to be specifically
targeted in conflicts and sexual violence is often used
as a tactic of war. Women and girls are also vulnerable
in post-conflict situations, especially in contested
political processes, ceasefires and the early days of the
implementation of peace agreements.

Sadly, the tragedy unfolding every day right across
our border in Syria constitutes a vivid example of the
urgency of the issue, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/20l4/181). It is high time
to focus on the ways and means of implementation
by sharing best practices and talking about specific
measures. Needless to say, the elimination of the root
cause of conflicts is the best way to prevent sexual
violence and address impunity.

Secondly, every conflict resolution effort or peace
and mediation process has a gender dimension. As such,
ensuring and increasing women's participation in all
aspects of decision-making and policy processes related
to the protection of international peace and security
is necessary. The importance of ensuring women's
effective participation in peace processes and conflict
resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, recovery
and mediation efforts was emphasized recently by the
Commission on the Status of Women. We hope that this
call will be reflected in other relevant texts as well.

Further emphasizing the particular vulnerabilities
and addressing the specific needs of women and girls
in the protection of civilians framework is a third way
forward. Three sets of efforts are of particular, practical
importance, namely: disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration efforts; security sector reform; and
capacity-building in the judicial sector. We applaud
the strong will expressed by the Secretary-General to
continue and strengthen efforts to implement the policy
of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In fact, all
international and regional operations should prioritize
this issue.

The Secretary-General's report emphasizes violence
against women and girls, particularly sexual violence,
as a driving factor of displacement and the need to put
into place effective measures of protection regarding
displaced persons. Let me take this opportunity to
touch upon some measures and best practices that
Turkey has employed in the camps established for the
Syrians fleeing this crisis, as relevant to the women and
peace and security agenda.

Information sessions are provided to Syrian families
and women in the camps on issues such as maternal
health, child mortality, the human rights of women and
girls, and domestic violence. In addition, measures
to discourage early and family-forced marriages
are undertaken. Turkish personnel employed at the
camps are regularly trained on the legal framework of
international protection and gender-related issues, in
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Practical training is also
given on the prevention of gender-based violence to
camp staff at all levels, as well as to security personnel
attached to camp settings, including soldiers, police
and gendarmerie.

To prevent assaults within camps and to protect
vulnerable groups, public areas are continuously
lighted and under closed-circuit television surveillance.
Special security units are present. In order to facilitate
access to justice for survivors, law enforcement
facilities are located in the camp areas to deal with
potential complaints and protection requests. Outside
the camps, Turkey has established violence monitoring
and prevention centres in 14 provinces where significant
populations of Syrians live. We have more than 90
shelter houses, with a capacity of more than 2,400
beds, that may house Syrian women fleeing domestic
or sexual violence. Also, women security personnel
are deployed to respond to potential specific needs of
women.

In situations of displacement, although primary
health care is usually available, the capacity and
resources to provide reproductive health and
psychosocial support services are often lacking. We
have prioritized these services for victims who were
targeted before and during their flight. Finding solutions
in displacement contexts is a broad issue that requires
holistic solutions. Women must be better integrated into
decision-making structures, society and the economy.
In that respect, we prioritize women's participation in
camps, with their inclusion in decision-making and
camp administration. Vocational training is available
in order to foster the economic empowerment of
women. Finally, the enrolment and continuation of girls
in school is prioritized as the best way to ensure long-
term gender equality.

I am surprised by the baseless accusations of the
regime's representative on organ transplant operations
in Turkey. Turkey is a democratic country and an open
society. What we do for the brotherly Syrian people in
Turkey does not need further explanation. It takes place
before the eyes of the international community and
in close cooperation with international organizations,
including the United Nations agencies. I therefore
entrust the evaluation of the remarks spoken before the
Council to the members of the Security Council and the
wider international community.

In conclusion, I thank the Nigerian presidency,
Member States and all relevant United Nations bodies,
in addition to the stakeholders at the local, national,
regional and global levels that prioritize the issue of
violence against women in conflict. Our special thanks
go to Special Representative Bangura, whose dedication
to fight against sexual violence in conflicts we strongly
support.

