Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for coming here today. I also thank you and
the German Minister for creating an environment
where over two thirds of the people sitting around the
table are women. That is fantastic, a taste of things to
come. I hope you will visit us often.

I also wanted to congratulate you, Madam, for
South Africa's fantastic record, with that 30 per cent
figure you gave us and your military colleagues, sitting
in the Chamber. That is incredibly impressive. I thank
you for your commitment to carry on producing women
for peacekeeping operations. The United Kingdom
joins you in that commitment. Sadly, we are only at
17 per cent, so you have the match on us. But I think,
nevertheless, there is more that all of us can do in
that regard.

As other speakers have said, this is a timely debate,
a year ahead of the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). It is a good opportunity for us to reflect on
the achievements and challenges in fully implementing
the resolution. But as we have heard from all the
fantastic briefers today and as the Executive Director
of UN-Women eloquently made clear, we must raise our
ambition, we must commit to even more radical change
and we need to ask ourselves, 20 years and 10 resolutions
later, why is there still such a stark implementation gap
when all the evidence suggests that incorporating the
gender perspective helps achieve sustainable peace
and security?

I think, again, as the Executive Director of UN-
Women said, that is a question we need to ask ourselves
all the time as we design any peace process, international
mechanism, project or programme. How can we make
sure that we are living up to the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000)? That obviously means putting a
particular focus on designing inclusive processes from
the outset. Arms and territory should not be the only
reason that negotiators get a seat at the table. That is
not right morally, it is not sensible economically and it
is not sensible or feasible if one wants ajust and lasting
peace settlement.

This year the United Kingdom funded Gender
Action for Peace and Security to deliver consultations
with civil society in our nine national action plan
focus countries. We did that because we wanted to
better understand how we can identify, and therefore
overcome, those gaps. We are taking concrete steps
to promote and protect women peace builders and
human rights defenders. We are providing sustainable
multi-year funding. And we are ensuring that we
practice what we preach in terms of representation
and policy.

As I look ahead to 2020, I hope we can have an effort
across the United Nations, not just in New York but right
across the whole United Nations system, both in the
field and in the other Headquarters buildings, to focus
efforts on the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). For our part, we will be particularly working
on increasing women's meaningful participation in
peace processes, notably in Afghanistan, South Sudan
and Yemen. The German Minister explained very
eloquently what was happening in Afghanistan, so I
will not repeat that. In Yemen, the United Kingdom
is funding a gender adviser and senior inclusion
position within the United Nations Special Envoy's
Office so that we can build on its work to take forward
women's participation in the peace process. Ahead of
the November deadline for a transitional Government
in South Sudan, we are continuing to work with local
women's groups to advocate for an inclusive process.
And, of course, with my very good friend and colleague
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, we have
also set up a women's group in New York, of which
the United States Ambassador is also a part, to take
forward the participation of women in that very
important peace process.

If I can turn to the United Nations -again, a number
of speakers mentioned the United Nations - obviously,
it has a huge role to play in implementing resolution
1325 (2000). On the nineteenth anniversary, with a year
to go to do something about it, the United Kingdom

would like to invite the United Nations to make progress
in three particular areas.
First, establishing a strong formal working
relationship with the Global Alliance of Women
Mediators Network will ensure women mediators
have access to key peace actors and are systematically
considered for deployment as negotiators, mediators
and advisers. Secondly, United Nations processes
need to set the gold standard for inclusion, and United
Nations Special envoys should be held to account on
their commitments to implement resolution 1325
(2000). Finally, we must ensure that United Nations-
led peace processes are closely supported by gender
experts to guarantee gender perspectives; this needs
to be integrated throughout the mission. This is not a
desirable; it is not a "nice to have"; it is an intrinsic part
of any successful peace process.

In conclusion, 2020 is notjust about resolution 1325
(2000). Next year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Beijing Platform for Action, the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, the fifth anniversary
of the youth, peace and security agenda, and 10 years
until the deadline to reach the Sustainable Development
Goals. We cannot let this moment slip through our
fingers. Now is the time to make progress on women
and peace and security as well as gender equality,
and the United Nations and its Member States have a
responsibility to deliver on all of this next year.

