Mrs. Craft (United States of America): The
United States joins other member States in support
of resolution 2493 (2019), on women and peace and
security. We remain deeply committed to this issue.
I commend South Africa for the cooperative spirit in
which it led this process.

However, the resolutionrefers to previous documents
that include references to sexual and reproductive
health. I must note that we cannot accept references
to sexual and reproductive health or any references to
safe termination of pregnancy or language that would
promote abortion or suggest a right to abortion. The
United States has stated clearly on many occasions,
consistent with the 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development Programme of Action
and its report, that we do not recognize abortion as a
method of family planning nor do we support it in our
women's global assistance initiatives.

The United Nations should not put itself in a
position of promoting or suggesting a right to abortion,
whether in its humanitarian or development work. A
new resolution on women and peace and security offers
an opportunity to highlight the great personal risk that
women face and to emphasise efforts to support and
protect women peacebuilders. We are pleased that this
resolution includes elements of the women and peace
and security agenda related to peacekeeping because,
as we all know, women improve the effectiveness of
peacekeeping missions.

However, the resolution falls short of putting the
full weight and support of the Council behind the
women who are putting their lives on the line every
day to build peace. The resolution also leaves out key
aspects of the Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which emphasizes that Member States
need to collectively ensure that a gender perspective is
integrated into all stages of peace processes.

While we appreciate the fact that the resolution
notes the system-wide gender parity strategy, we are
disappointed that it fails to highlight the aspects of
the strategy that are aimed at increasing the number
of women in the military and police contingents of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Individually,
we should all be taking steps to address the persistent
barriers that women peacekeepers face and to overcome
these barriers in our systems. We continue to urge all
troop- and police-contributing countries to adopt and
promote policies to achieve these objectives.

