Mr. van Oosterom (Netherlands): My delegation
welcomes this debate on the important report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2014/181). The fact that the report covers incidents
of conflict-related sexual violence in over 20 countries
confirms the urgency of our meeting today.

We fully align ourselves with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. In the
interests of time, I will deliver a shortened version of
my speech; the full text is available.

In the view of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
conflict-related sexual violence is not a stand-alone
problem that can be solved in isolation. We need a
fully integrated approach that addresses deeply rooted
gender inequalities and works to empower women.

We pay tribute to the work of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab
Bangura. It is a privilege to sit next to her and an honour
to support her work. We agree with her that now is the
time to focus on progressing from principles, goals and
ambitions to concrete action, operational measures and
practical tools.

The Netherlands seeks to use such practical tools
in all domains of our foreign policy: the promotion
of peace, justice and development. When it comes to
peace and security, we contribute civilian and military
personnel to multilateral missions. Addressing gender
issues and sexual violence in conflict is an integral
part of our national preparation for such missions.
For instance, we currently have a contingent deployed
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. All of our police and
military officer have received predeployment training
on gender, human rights and international humanitarian
law.

We also offer regular training on gender issues
to military personnel, diplomats and police, as well
as to civilian experts and activists. We make civilian
expertise on gender and combating sexual violence
available to United Nations missions, for example to
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With regard to justice, we welcome the focus
Ms. Bangura and United Nations Action have put on
issues of impunity and accountability around conflict-
related sexual violence. National legal systems in
conflict-affected countries can be weakened in the
course of the conflict and in the reconstruction
phase. The Netherlands therefore attaches great value
to legitimate and professional justice systems. We
therefore support rule of law programming in several
countries on a bilateral basis.

There is also the need for a clear role for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and other tribunals.
My country very much supports the broad jurisdiction
of the ICC on the issue of conflict-related sexual
violence. It has a very strong preventative effect.

The report ofthe Secretary-General also shows that
we need to do even more to optimize the protection of
women and girls, who are the primary victims of sexual
violence. Despite our collective efforts in that regard,
women and girls will face the long-term consequences
of such violence. They deserve and have the right to
sexual and reproductive health, including safe abortion
services. To recall what our French colleague said this
morning, to withhold such services to victims of sexual
violence is to add insult to injury.

Women and girls are never only victims, though. We
know about the resilience of many survivors. We also
know that empowered women make the difference: they
participate in decision-making and take up leadership
roles, particularly on issues of conflict prevention,
resolution, peacebuilding and reconstruction.

We believe in the power of women as agents of
peace and as representatives of communities living in
conflict. As women are empowered, sexual violence,
causes of gender inequality and accountability will
more likely be addressed as integral parts of peace and
reconstruction processes. For example, we are working
with UN-Women to support the Syrian Women's
Initiative for Peace and Democracy to make their voices
heard. The initiative of the women of Syria inspired
many and offered a new window of hope for a political
solution to the horrific conflict in Syria.
We welcome further commitment of the Security
Council to the full agenda of resolution 1325 (2000) as
we try to do in the Netherlands. Our national Action Plan
1325 promotes civil society programming in support
of women's political participation and leadership. We
support women's rights organizations around the globe
and we contribute to several United Nations trust
funds, such as the United Nations Women's Trust Fund
to Eliminate Violence against Women.

Together we must continue our common efforts to
combat the crime of sexual violence in conflict through
concrete and collective action. Rest assured that the
Netherlands will continue to be a partner of the United
Nations, the Special Representative and Member States
in this important endeavour.

