Mrs. Schneeberger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 19
years ago signalled that we cannot achieve sustainable
peace without women's full, equal and meaningful
participation at all levels of decision-making. Collective
efforts have advanced the women and peace and security
agenda since then. However, we have heard not only
today that the many requirements set out in resolution
1325 (2000) and the subsequent eight resolutions have
yet to be fulfilled. Switzerland is strongly committed
to fully implementing that normative framework,
particularly with regard to the following three priorities.

First, as one of the first countries with a national
action plan, Switzerland adopted the fourth version last
year. The action plan is a key instrument to monitor
progress. We are committed to sharing our lessons
learned with other countries. We therefore support
Chad in developing its first national action plan. In
that regard, Switzerland welcomes the launching by the
African Union of its first report on the implementation
of the women, peace and security agenda in Africa
this month.

Secondly, as stated in our national action plan,
women have a key role to play in conflict prevention.
Earlier this month, three female civil society
representatives briefed the Council during its debate
on peace and security in Africa (see S/PV.8633) and
underlined the positive role that women can play in that
regard. Also, Swiss non-governmental organizations
have produced a study showing how the women and
peace and security agenda can promote prevention,
including of violent extremism. The Security Council
must build on those efforts and ensure that its relevant
resolutions, including mission mandates, contain
provisions requiring women's meaningful participation
in peace and security and the establishment of conflict-
prevention activities and mechanisms.

Thirdly, the full implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda requires that the entire
international community and United Nations system,
across its three pillars, contribute to that effort. We
commend and support the Peacebuilding Commission's
important convening and advisory role in such work and
other issues. Switzerland has for example been active in
raising awareness of the role that the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women can play
in such implementation. Civil society and human rights
defenders, in particular women, also have a crucial
role to play in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda. We call on all States to respect
their international obligations and commitments to
that end. We must all step up our efforts and deliver
on our commitments. Switzerland looks forward to
contributing to that goal by chairing, together with
South Africa, the Women, Peace and Security Focal
Points Network in 2021.

