Mr. Thomson (Fiji): Thank you for the welcome,
Madam President; it is an honour to share the
graveyard shift with you this evening. I believe I am
the last speaker. Ijoin with others in thanking you for
convening this debate. Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), adopted 14 years ago, along with subsequent
resolutions affirm that women's participation in conflict
prevention, mitigation and recovery is imperative for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) also highlights the focus of
our discussions today, notably that women and girls
in displaced groups are subject to violence, sexual
exploitation and abuse.

The Fiji delegation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2122 (2013) by the Council last October.
That important step builds on the previous momentum
by incorporating essential accountability checks that
aim to change the business-as-usual approach. We urge
the Council to continue such a progressive approach so
that women's peace and security issues remain at the
forefront.

The exponential increase in the global number of
displaced people is a matter of great concern. Tragically,
over 50 million people are currently displaced, the
highest number since the Second World War. The
record shows that women and girls in such situations
are the most vulnerable groups, often becoming
victims of violence, sexual exploitation and abuse. In
the context of prolonged and repeated displacement,
effective mechanisms to prevent abuse and violence are
often absent or limited. Therefore, guaranteed access
to legal and justice systems for displaced women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict settings is crucial
in order to ensure that their vital needs are addressed.
We must redouble our efforts to implement the relevant
legislation, reinforce the rule of law and ensure the
protection of victims, witnesses andjustice officials so
as to safeguard displaced victims, particularly the most
vulnerable women and girls.

Often, displaced women and girl survivors who
have experienced violence, sexual exploitation and
abuse suffer from stigmatization, social shunning and
reprisals from within their communities. Therefore,
the provision of critical support services, such as
psychological support, mental health support and the
provision of health care services, is essential for their
social rehabilitation.

In tandem with current efforts by the United
Nations to mainstream gender within the United
Nations system, Fiji is endeavouring to make its
contribution to that global effort. Fiji is committed
to the alignment of policies so as to provide its best
gender-sensitized peacekeepers in helping to rebuild
post conflict communities. We recognize that national
implementation will be crucial in meeting the objectives
of resolution 1325 (2000).

The involvement of women in peace and security
requires a multidimensional approach, and Fiji is
guided by the regional action plan on women and
peace and security, which supports our national efforts
to ensure that women are active participants at all
stages of national life, including conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding. In that respect, the Fiji
Constitution of 2013 encompasses a comprehensive
range of human rights, including the right to freedom
from unfair discrimination based on sex or gender. On
the eve of International Women's Day this year, Fiji
launched its national gender policy, which has become
the guiding document for mainstreaming gender issues
across all sectors and within all spheres of national life.
Fiji is committed to increasing women's participation
in decision-making in political, social and economic
processes at all levels.

In the context of the Pacific Islands, the issue of
climate change and the associated calamities of sea-
level rise and the increasing frequency and severity of
natural disasters, has resulted in disproportionately high
financial, political and social costs for our developing
island States. It is widely accepted that the first to bear
the negative impacts of climate change are vulnerable
groups, particularly women and girls. Climate change
not only affects our land and food resources, but the
resulting sea-level rise also forces the displacement of
our coastal communities. We urge the Security Council
to accept that climate change is a security issue and
that vigilance must be applied to ensure that vulnerable
women and girls are safeguarded.

In conclusion, we acknowledge that progress has
been made by countries in the implementation of the
resolution; however, it is undeniable there is still so
much more to be achieved so as to ensure that the dignity,
peace and security of women is realized globally. The
Fiji delegation calls on the United Nations system and
its agencies, in partnership with Member States and
regional organizations, to support the development and
implementation of national action plans so that greater
progress can be achieved.

