Mr. Olinger (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully supports the statement made at this
morning's meeting by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union and congratulates the
Vietnamese presidency of the Council on having
organized today's important debate.

We also welcome today's adoption of resolution
1889 (2009), as well as resolutions 1882 (2009) and
1888 (2009) on women and children in armed conflict.
Today's open debate marks yet another anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, the first resolution adopted by the
Council that specifically addresses the impact of war
on women and recognizes their role in conflict
management and resolution and their contribution to
the search for lasting peace.

Unfortunately, we are compelled to note that
progress in the implementation of the
recommendations therein remains insufficient. 2010
will be an especially important year, for it will afford
us an opportunity - at the commemoration of the
fifteenth anniversary of the Beijing Conference and of
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), as well as at the ministerial session of the
Economic and Social Council on the empowerment of
women - to take stock of the work accomplished and
above all to identify and effectively remedy
shortcomings. We further hope that 2010 will see the
establishment of the composite gender entity under the
Secretariat. We are convinced that the timely creation
of the entity will considerably strengthen the
cohesiveness of measures undertaken for women in the
United Nations system.

Women and girls are often the primary victims of
conflict and have specific needs in post-conflict
situations, especially when they have been displaced,
are refugees, or have been mistreated or maimed by
anti-personnel landmines, as so rightly noted by
Ms. Alberdi this morning. Those specific needs must
be taken into account in assessing countries'
requirements as they emerge permanently from
conflict. In post-conflict situations, women must
become important engines for peace and security in
09-54249
their communities. It is indeed critical that women be
more involved in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts at all levels. The involvement of women in
decision-making processes from the start should
subsequently provide for their better participation in
development efforts.

Generally speaking, Luxembourg fully endorses
the Secretary-General's recommendations in his report
(S/2009/465) on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). My country especially welcomes the
recommendation that the Security Council
energetically pursue a strategy aimed at increasing the
participation of women in all peace processes,
especially within the framework of peace negotiations
and mediation.

Member States will have to demonstrate the
political will to fully implement resolution 1325
(2000). It is especially incumbent on them to utilize all
existing provisions of international law, international
humanitarian law and international criminal law, as
well as not to tolerate impunity and to refer to national
and international tribunals individuals suspected of
having committed crimes against women. The Security
Council could assist States in their efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) by establishing, as
recommended by the Secretary-General, a clear and
exhaustive standing follow-up mechanism that would
enable us to assess progress achieved.

Luxembourg also stresses the important role that
the Peacebuilding Commission could play in
encouraging all parties, including States on its agenda,
to provide for the participation of women in their
peacebuilding strategies and to ensure that women's
civil society organizations be effectively consulted and
represented in country-specific configurations. We
could also ensure that the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council launch a dialogue on the
best way to address the negative impacts of conflict on
women and consider how to involve women in full
participation in peacebuilding efforts and post-conflict
reconstruction.

My country strives for the systematic
incorporation of the gender dimension in its
cooperation projects in order to better to respond to the
Millennium Development Goals, and fully backs the
peace initiatives taken by local women's groups and
the exhaustive work of non-governmental
organizations to ensure the equal participation of
09-54249
women in post-conflict situations. We welcome the
participation in this debate of the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

