Mr. Diallo (Guinea)(spoke in French): The
organization of this meeting is evidence of our
Council's will and determination to continue to assume
our responsibilities in the framework of the follow-of
resolution 1325 (2000), entitled "Women, peace and
security". Through this resolution the Security Council
underscored not only the impact of conflict on women
but also their role in conflict settlement and in peace-
building. It also emphasized the duties of the different
players in the international community. The important
presentations just made by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Ms. Angela King and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer shed further
light on the efforts that are under way for the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I would
like, on this occasion, to express my delegation's
appreciation to them for the quality of the work
accomplished.

By adopting the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, the international community recognized,
among other things, the importance of questions related
to women in armed conflict. The conclusions of the
1998 and 2001 sessions of the Commission on the
Status of Women, as well as the recommendations of
the ad hoc committee of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly, "Beijing plus five",
also underscored these questions in many regards.

In the framework of the effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) for which responsibility falls
on Governments, on the United Nations system, on
regional and subregional organizations, as well as on
non-governmental organizations and civil society, the
following considerations deserve to be emphasized.

First, within the United Nations system, every
body must identify clearly those areas in which it can
make its contribution. The tank will then be to seek out
areas of complementarity among the different bodies.
In this regard, cooperation between Ms. Angela King's
office, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs is to be encouraged.

Secondly, at the country, regional and subregional
levels, it will be necessary to strengthen the
accomplishments, to share experiences and to envisage
appropriate solutions. In this context, I am pleased to
note the important role being played by Guinean
women aimed at putting an end to instability in the
West African subregion. In fact, the Network of
African Women Ministers and Parliamentarians
(REFAMP) organized a subregional conference in
Conakry, from 24 to 26 January 2000 on the prevention
and settlement of conflicts.

This initiative was supported by the women of the
Mano River Union, at the subregional level, as was
indicated a while ago by Ms. Angela King. My
delegation appreciates similar initiatives undertaken in
other regions and subregions, and believes that the
United Nations should gather information on these
different experiences, so that it can be shared with the
international community.

Thirdly, in the context of non-governmental
organizations, we appreciate the work of the Working
Group on Women, International Peace and Security. Its
actions deserve to be supported by all. We also believe
that a sharing of experiences among these different
parties will contribute to an overall understanding of
the question before us.

My delegation appreciates the role of
coordination played by Ms. Angela King's office
through the establishment of a study group on
resolution 1325 (2000) to contribute to the preparation
of the Secretary-General's report. We are awaiting this
report with interest. In our opinion, it will take into
account the multidimensional nature of the impact of
conflicts on women and young girls, as well as their
role in the prevention and settlement of conflicts and in
peace-building.

We are also convinced that the report will assess
the implementation of the different provisions of the
resolution and identify the obstacles to be overcome,
while placing emphasis on the respective
responsibilities of the different players. My country,
Guinea, which has experience in the area now before
us, is prepared to make its contribution to this shared
effort.

