Ms. Rwankuba (spoke in French): My name is
Agathe Rwankuba. I am a lawyer at the Bukavu Court
of Appeals and a member of the non-governmental
organization Reseau des femmes pour la defense des
droits et la paix, based in Bukavu, in the province of
South Kivu, in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

First, I extend my sincere thanks to the
Government of the United Kingdom, the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, and
International Alert for giving me the opportunity to
participate in this meeting on behalf of the women of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In my statement today, I shall make three specific
recommendations to help the Council in its efforts to
eradicate sexual violence against women. We all are
aware of the extent of gender-based violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For example, in the
eastern part of the country, we believe that at least
35,000 women and girls have been raped since the
beginning of the war in 1996. Given the extent and the
devastating consequences of gender-specific violence
in the Democratic Republic of Congo and many other
conflict areas throughout the world, I would like to
thank the Security Council and the United Kingdom
during its presidency for devoting today's meeting to
this issue.

My first recommendation is that financing
allocated to the Human Rights Section and the Gender
Section of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
should be enhanced in order to establish a genuine
partnership with local women's organizations. The fact
that the Security Council, by resolution 1565 (2004),
has enlarged MONUC's mandate is positive. Since
December 2002, MONUC's Human Rights Section has
been working in the province of South Kivu with local
women's organizations, including my own, in order to
identify and rehabilitate the victims of violence,
according to their rights. The organizations support the
women living in the most remote rural regions, to
which MONUC has no access due to lack of sufficient
resources. MONUC's Gender Section is based in
Kinshasa, which is 2,000 kilometres from South Kivu.
My organization has never had the opportunity to meet
a staff member of the Gender Section. It is clear that
the Gender Section should have greater support in
order to form an effective partnership with women's
organizations.

Secondly, I endorse the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that states that the Security Council,
Member States, the United Nations and other
international organizations should "Apply increased
pressure on parties to armed conflict to cease all
violations of the human rights of women and girls,
including sexual and gender-based violence".
(5/2004/814, para. 87)

Although the war in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has officially ended, some local and foreign
militias continue to sow terror and commit sexual
violence in the eastern part of the country. The fact that
the Security Council has decided to strengthen the
number of Blue Helmets in my country has given rise
to enormous hope among the local population,
especially the women with whom I work every day. We
must earnestly hope that those peacekeeping forces
will help strengthen security in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, restore peace in our region and
prevent other crimes.

However, given the great extent of our national
territory, the number of Blue Helmets continues to be
clearly insufficient. That is why I urge the Security
Council to further strengthen their number and
presence in the east of the country as soon as possible,
to help the country to work in consultation with its
neighbours to disarm and repatriate foreign militias,
and to apply pressure on countries that still have armed
groups in our country to repatriate them.

Another particularly alarming problem in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is that some armed
groups continue to hold girl soldiers as sex slaves,
thereby excluding them from the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process. It is
imperative that those girls be included in the MONUC
programmes. Therefore I urge the Security Council to
provide the Gender Section and the Human Rights
Section of MONUC with the necessary human and
financial resources in order to collect information on
those girl soldiers and ensure that they are
demobilized.

Finally, I recommend that the Security Council,
in accordance with paragraph 87 of the report of the
Secretary-General on women, peace and security, act
immediately to put an end to impunity by means of the
following measures. First, there should be an
independent international enquiry to identify in a
precise manner those responsible, individually and
collectively, for sexual violence against women during
the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Secondly, the Human Rights Section and the Gender
Section of MONUC should be requested to work with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which has ratified the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, to harmonize national
legislation with international standards.

The women of South Kivu have mobilized to
combat sexual Violence and fight for the vindication of
the rights of the victims. The Coalition Against Gender
Violence, of which my organization is a founding
member, has made proposals to reform national
criminal law to redefine and strengthen criminal laws
against rape. However, those proposals have gone
unheeded.

Although rape and sexual abuse spare no age
group, they particularly affect the active female
population in agricultural areas, which is the main
productive force and essential pillar in any subsistence
economy of the region. The physical and moral damage
suffered by those women has considerably reduced
their productivity, thereby exacerbating the poverty of
rural communities.

In that context, it is important for the
international community to provide funds for women's
groups in rural communities, work in close cooperation
with those groups and take into consideration their
point of View in the reconstruction process, as the
Secretary-General recommends in paragraph 88 of his
report. The necessary resources should be provided for
programmes that provide care and support to victims of
sexual violence. In particular, all female victims should
have access to medical assistance in order to treat
medical problems resulting from rape and sexually
transmitted diseases such as HIV/AIDS.

In conclusion, I express my thanks for the
praiseworthy efforts that have been made so far by the
Security Council to bring peace and security to the
women of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
However, I ask the Council to accept the following
three recommendations to better protect women,
prevent renewed violence and encourage the
participation of women.

First, funding has to be increased for the Gender
Section and Human Rights Section of MONUC so that
they can work in partnership with women's
organizations and assist victims of sexual violence.

Secondly, peacekeeping forces in the country
need to be strengthened, and the Gender Section and
Human Rights Section of MONUC must receive
human and financial resources so that they can collect
information enabling them to identify girl soldiers and
ensure that they are included in DDR programmes.

Thirdly, we must act immediately to put an end to
impunity by urging the Gender Section and the Human
Rights Section of MONUC to advocate legislative
reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
by establishing an independent international
commission of inquiry on sexual violence committed
during the war in the country.

