Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
appreciate the opportunity to address the Council on
the issue of women and peace and security. The United
States reiterates its commitment to working with others
to prevent the use of sexual violence as a tactic of
warfare and to ensure the full participation of women
in peace processes and at all decision-making levels of
the United Nations.

Today, I would like to make two points. First,
while we have made progress, it is imperative that the
United Nations do more and continue to keep the issue
of women and peace and security in the spotlight. Rape
is a crime and sexual violence has a grievous moral
and psychological impact, damaging not just the lives
of individuals and families, but also communities and
entire societies.

However, through greater awareness and action,
the international community is responding. For
example, in recent months, the Congolese Government,
in conjunction with organizations like the American
Bar Association and the United Nations, has instituted
programmes that have contributed to a decrease of
sexual violence and dramatic increases in prosecutions.
Even so, women, especially women in rural villages,
are not safe. Protection and assistance for victims of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict remain
an essential part of the solution. The United Nations
has made laudable steps, but must do more. It is
especially important to eradicate sexual exploitation by
peacekeepers.

The United Nations must also do more to factor
the issue of women, peace and security into
development portfolios across various sectors,
including health, education, democracy and
governance, and economic growth.

We must continue to address human trafficking,
especially in conflict situations, where women and
girls are often abducted by militia and turned into
slaves or war wives. That is why the attention of the

Council to this issue is so important. Resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008) address sexual violence and
exploitation in conflict situations more forcefully than
ever before. Resolution 1820 (2008) in particular
requires the Secretary-General to report on specific
situations in which sexual violence has been widely or
systematically employed against civilians in such
situations. The United States is pleased that the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), with its expertise on conflict situations, will
be contributing to the Secretary-General's report on the
implementation of the resolution.

We recommend that DPKO draw on the inter-
agency resources of the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict, so that the wide range of
experts and observers in the field can gather the
sensitive information necessary to identify and combat
sexual Violence as an instrument of war.

Secondly, we must also increase women's
participation in all aspects of building peace and
security. Resolution 1820 (2008) recognizes and
highlights the need for those essential contributions,
but also points out that there is not adequate
participation of women in peace negotiations and
processes. The United States believes that ensuring the
full participation of women in peace processes and the
increased representation of women at all decision-
making levels are essential.

Positive steps have been taken. For example, in
2006, female foreign ministers and other high-ranking
officials from around the world, including United
States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, formed a
Women Leaders' Working Group. The Group works to
ensure that the issues of women's political
participation, access to justice, economic
empowerment, poverty reduction, combating violence
against women and women in conflict and post-conflict
situations get high-level international attention. The
Group has also made efforts to promote the
appointment of senior women as special
representatives and envoys of the Secretary-General.

Last May, the United States launched a public-
private partnership called The One Woman Initiative
that focuses on women's entrepreneurship, leadership
and the rule of law. The United States Government and
private donors have provided $100 million in funding
and the first grant will be rewarded in November. Also
this year, the United States hosted a senior round table
for women's justice at which judges from around the
world addressed women's lack of access to justice and
discussed best practices to combat violence against
women and improve women's legal enfranchisement.
The activities ranged from the contribution by Avon
Products of $1 million to the United Nations Trust
Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence
against Women, to a programme that will bring
23 Malawi federal judges to the United States this fall
for training on issues related to violence against
women.

The United States welcomes the conclusion of the
Secretary-General's report, which states that the
deployment of women in field facilities engaging with
civilians will lead to more access for women and girls
to appropriate services and lower the incidence of
sexual violence and abuse. We also applaud efforts by
nations such as Jamaica to include an equal number of
women and men in their United Nations peacekeeping
contingents.

The United Nations would like to commend
Secretary-General Ban for his leadership and
commitment to increasing the number of women
candidates for United Nations special representative
and envoy positions. At present, 15 of the 37 United
Nations senior leadership positions are held by women.
The United States hope that those appointments will
continue to increase and that empowerment issues
become more prevalent in the country-specific reports
to the Council.

At the same time, however, we recognize that
women continue to be underrepresented in peace
negotiations. As was mentioned by Ms. Taylor,
according to a study by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, which was released last
night, only 2.7 per cent of signatories of the
13 agreements they reviewed were women. When
information on negotiations was available, there was
no female lead negotiator and women's participation in
negotiating delegations averaged only 7 per cent. The
United States looks forward to working with Council
members and the international community to greatly
improve those numbers.

