Ms. Sultana: I am a Rohingya lawyer, researcher
and educator who specializes in the trauma, mass rape
and trafficking of Rohingya girls and women. I have
been working directly with Rohingya women and
girls in the refugee camps in Bangladesh since 2014.
As a senior researcher, I have worked with Kalandan
Press on a few reports. I am a coordinator of the Free
Rohingya Coalition, Director of the women's section
of the Arakan Rohingya National Organization and the
founder of Rohingya Women Welfare. Today I speak
on behalf of my people, who have been driven from our
motherland. Where I come from, women and girls have
been gang-raped, tortured and killed by the Myanmar
army for no reason other than for being Rohingya. I
also speak today on behalf of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security.

Since August last year, more than 670,000 Rohingya
have fled Myanmar. That is the fastest refugee
movement since the Rwanda genocide. I am extremely
grateful to Bangladesh for opening its borders.
However, the international community, particularly
the Security Council, has failed us. The most recent
crisis could have been prevented if the warning signs
since 2012 had not been ignored. Since that time,
State security forces have committed human rights
abuses against the Rohingya. Officials then placed
severe restrictions on our freedom of movement, which
limited access to a livelihood, health care, food and
education. Discrimination against the Rohingya people
dates to as far back as 1982, when we were stripped of
our citizenship rights. Many of Myanmar's other ethnic
minorities - including the Karen, Kachin, Chin,
Hmong and Shan peoples - have also faced decades
of entrenched discrimination, rape and other human
rights violations owing to the military operating with
impunity. Other ethnic women's groups in Myanmar
have documented such patterns for decades. In 2002,
the Shan groups released a report that described the
same patterns of gang-rape, killing and mutilation. In
2014, the Women's League of Burma released a report
that documented the rape of more than 100 ethnic
women by the Myanmar army. That demonstrated how,
even after the elections in 2010, the Myanmar army was
still raping ethnic women with impunity. The same is
happening now, only on a much larger scale.

My own research and interviews provide evidence
that Government troops raped many more than 300
women and girls in 17 villages in Rakhine state. With
more than 350 villages attacked and burned since
August 2017, that number is probably only a fraction
of the actual total number of women raped. Girls as
young as six years of age were gang-raped. Women and
girls were caught and gang-raped in their homes as they
ran away or tried to cross the border into Bangladesh.
Some were horribly mutilated and burned alive. The
sexual violence involved hundreds of soldiers and
occurred across a large part of Rakhine state. Such
scale and breadth provide strong evidence that rape was
systematically planned and used as a weapon against
my people. The pattern of mutilation of women's private
parts after rape suggests a specific directive to instil
terror among the Rohingya people, as well as to destroy
their very means of reproduction. With hundreds of
thousands of troops deployed across Myanmar, it has
horrifying implications for the safety of women and
girls across the country.

There are similar situations around the world,
such as in Syria and Yemen. More than 3 million
women and girls are at risk of sexual and gender-
based violence in Yemen. In Syria, the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic found that sexual violence carried out
by Government forces and militias formed part of the
widespread and systematic attacks directed against the
civilian population.

Rohingyas continue to flee today, and humanitarian
organizations estimate that 60 per cent of the displaced
Rohingya currently in Cox's Bazar, in Bangladesh, are
women and girls. Had Bangladesh closed its borders, the
situation would have been considerably worse. However,
the international community and humanitarian agencies
need to urgently scale up the health and protection
services to support the Rohingya refugees. That must
include unhindered access to life-saving health care
services, mental and psychosocial care and improved
conditions of sanitation, water and hygiene. Despite
the acute need, post-rape care, including access to safe
abortions and emergency contraception, is critically
low in the camps. Women and girls with disabilities
and the elderly face greater risks and needs, which are
not being addressed. There must be a faster registration
process for non-governmental organizations specialized
in humanitarian sexual reproductive health care and in
women's empowerment and protection programming.

My greatest concern is the increased incidents of
young women being trafficked, some of whom are as
young as 12 years old. Young women and girls either are
kidnapped or are promised jobs or marriage offers and
then disappear. Many see no future and are desperate
to escape to a better life. They are easily trapped by
false promises and then never seen again. There have
also been cases of young teenage boys being abducted.
I am working on an awareness campaign for parents
and community leaders to provide their girls with a
protected environment.

Young Rohingya women have a vital role to
play in such awareness-raising and in coordinating
humanitarian assistance in the camps. They should be
encouraged to volunteer, as they will be trusted by their
community to relay Vital information and, at the same
time, they will learn important leadership skills. Many
young Rohingya women in the refugee camps want
to help their people and to be actively involved in the
future of their community. They need to be supported
and provided with the necessary training to do so. It is

time to empower our Rohingya women and girls with
vision, respect and support in whatever way we can.

Later this month, the Security Council will visit
the refugee camps in Cox's Bazar and continue on to
Myanmar. During that visit, its members must meet
women and girl survivors. I can facilitate safe meetings.
They must work with the Bangladesh authorities to stop
the trafficking, pressure the Myanmar Government and
senior officials to cooperate with the United Nations
independent international fact-finding mission on
Myanmar and insist on unrestricted humanitarian
access across Rakhine state.

The rule of law must drive the response to the
Rohingya crisis. International pressure is urgently
needed to end impunity in Myanmar and to support
political and legal reform that ends the oppression of
all ethnic peoples in Myanmar. Any return of refugees
to Myanmar must be in accordance with international
standards and must be safe, dignified and voluntary.
As the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State
recommended, and many members of the Council
agreed, the Government of Myanmar must address
the central questions of Rohingya citizenship, rights,
freedom of movement and equality before the law. My
people must be guaranteed their safety upon return
to Myanmar. My people are not asking for citizenship;
we want our right to citizenship back. My people must
be guaranteed their safety upon return to Myanmar.
My people must be guaranteed their safety upon return
to Burma.

The Myanmar military is listed for the first time
in this year's report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250). In the
light of that and the ongoing impunity of the army, the
Security Council must refer the situation in Myanmar
to the International Criminal Court without delay, for
its horrific crimes against Rohingya as well as for
violations against other ethnic groups in the country,
including in the Shan, Karin, Kachin and other states. It
is hypocritical to condemn the human rights violations
and express horror at the new violence, while then
also selling arms to Myanmar and seeking explorative
licenses to mine its natural resources. Member States
committed to conflict prevention and sustaining peace
cannot turn a blind eye to State-sanctioned persecution
of an ethnic minority, discrimination or other human
rights violations, including sexual violence for trade.
That applies to Myanmar and all crises elsewhere.

My statement today is not only for Rohingya
women but for my other ethnic sisters who are also
facing atrocities. Women community leaders from
different ethnicities across Myanmar are working
together to build inter-ethnic peace and community
relations. We believe in a peaceful and united Myanmar
for all ethnicities.

