Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on presiding
over the Council for this month. I thank you for holding
this important open debate. I also thank Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC); Mr. Kevin
Hyland, United Kingdom Independent Anti-Slavery
Commissioner; and the observer of the Elman Peace
and Human Rights Centre in Somalia for their valuable
briefings this morning.

Trafficking in persons is a reality and an international
phenomenon that challenges the international will and
human values. It is a grave violation of human rights.
It is a complex threat that targets vulnerable groups,
particularly women and children, in addition to persons
with disabilities and the elderly. Trafficking in persons
is a serious problem often caused by conflicts, which
create waves of displaced persons. Hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons and refugees
are forced to leave their homes and homelands to seek a
decent living. The phenomenon is compounded by the
fact that terrorist groups benefit from it, as they exploit,
recruit and brainwash youth to get them to conduct
terrorist operations. The proceeds of trafficking in
persons are used in those operations.

The adoption of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and the United
Nations Plan of Action on Combating Trafficking in
Persons constitutes the legal basis for the international
community to combat human trafficking. However, the
international community has been unable to end the
crises and conflicts. Moreover, the policies adopted have
failed to end the violations of the fundamental rights of
individuals and peoples and failed to combat impunity,
which has led to continued trafficking in persons.
Crises and conflicts create an enabling environment for
trafficking in persons and for the perpetuation of that
phenomenon, which violates the rights of individuals
and populations.

Qatar is committed to international law and
seeks to enhance cooperation in that field. Hence, we
have supported the United Nations Plan of Action on
Combating Trafficking in Persons since its adoption.
We have taken legal steps, and we have promulgated a
national law on trafficking in persons that criminalizes
it in all its forms. We have taken strict legal action to
prevent and criminalize money-laundering as one of the
tools used in human trafficking.
Qatar is one of the major contributors to the United
Nations Trust Fund for Victims of Human Trafficking.
We seek to enhance international cooperation in the
field of combating crime, especially as manifested in
human trafficking. We hosted the thirteenth United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice. The adoption of the Doha Declaration on
integrating crime prevention and criminal justice into
the wider United Nations agenda so as to address the
social and economic challenges and promote the rule of
law at the national and international levels was a step
towards dealing with this crime.

We are one of the major supporters of UNODC,
as it is the main United Nations points of reference in
efforts to combat crime. We believe in the rule of law
at the national and international levels. We believe in
the role that the rule of law plays in combating mass
atrocities and violations of human rights in countries
suffering from conflict. We have therefore worked with
partners in international groups to combat impunity.
We understand the high human price that civilians pay
in Syria as they are forced to migrate and fall victims
to traffickers. Hence, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 71/248, on the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic. That is an important
step towards combating human trafficking as an
international crime.

We believe in the need to preserve human dignity,
and we honour our international legal obligations.
Hence, together with our partners, we participate in the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons. Moreover, my country has approved the
request by the General Assembly that I should serve
as a co-facilitator with Greece for the evaluation of the
implementation of the United Nations Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons, which will be held in
October 2017.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that the international
community's efforts to combat this phenomenon
requires concerted action, the most important part of
which is to resolve conflicts and crises and to combat
impunity. We will continue to support all the efforts of
the Security Council aimed at ending human trafficking.

