Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Given that this is my first statement with Peru as
President, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, and
to thank you for convening this open debate. I also
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence and Conflict and, ofcourse, Ms. Razia Sultana
and her organization for their briefings today.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/250) before
the Council highlights Colombia's efforts to make
gender justice a central issue throughout its peace
process and in its efforts to tackle cases of sexual
violence in conflict. Colombia recognizes that the
signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace does not
actually constitute peace in itself, but it is a necessary
step towards the changes that we need to bring about the
peaceful and reconciled society that we in our region
and the international community have so longed for.

Colombia has been adapting its constitutional
framework to respond to the challenges that we face
after more than 50 years of armed conflict, and the role
of women will unquestionably be key to implementing
it. In recognition of that, within our new institutions we
have established a specialized gender unit, made up of
women leaders, that will help us achieve the changes
that the Peace Agreement identifies as needed in order
to offer women - especially the rural women who
were most affected by the decades of conflict on their
land - better living conditions that can help to empower
them and bring them the economic independence that
can break the eternal cycle of Violence that tramples on
their rights.
The Peace Agreement establishes the creation of
a comprehensive system of transitional justice that
includes various legal and non-legal mechanisms.
The members of those institutions were elected in
September. For the first time in our country, 28 of
the 51 judges in the Special Jurisdiction for Peace are
women, and a woman now presides over the court. The
missing persons search unit is led by a female director.
Women compose 54 per cent of the comprehensive
system, which reflects their interest and their right
in applying the provisions of the Agreement related
to gender. Colombia recognizes the need to ensure
accountability for sexual violence crimes committed
in the context of the conflict. That is why last month,
the new director of the office for investigations and
prosecutions indicated that the composition of that
particular group is being worked on, with the aim of
investigating all cases of sexual violence that occurred
in the context of the armed conflict.

At this stage, we need to pay special attention to
access to justice and reparations for victims of the
armed conflict, because we cannot forget that 51 per
cent of the officially registered victims of the armed
conflict are women. That is why we have established a
gender perspective as part of our targeted approach. We
are applying the strategy of individual reparations for
female victims of sexual violence, notjust in the Special
Jurisdiction but also with regard to ordinary cases, and
we are making enormous efforts to emphasize that and
to resolve every case.

Colombia is firmly committed and feels a
tremendous responsibility to the international
community and our own communities. As the Special
Representative said this morning, the story of sexual
violence and war has been a story of denial. Nothing
can be resolved through silence. That is why we
persevere in our efforts - so that services, justice and
reparations can reach the survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence.

