Mr. Wenawaser (Liechtenstein): Mr. President,
we wish to thank you and your delegation for
organizing this debate, for preparing a concept paper
(S/2007/598, annex) in advance, and for putting
together the presidential statement that will be adopted
later today.

The concept paper and the report submitted by
the Secretary-General (8/2007/567) make it clear that
we must considerably strengthen our efforts to
guarantee the protection of women and girls in
conflict-affected societies and to ensure their full and
equal participation in peace processes, including
negotiations and decision-making. It is a well
documented fact that civilians, particularly women and
children, continue to account for the vast majority of
those adversely affected by armed conflict, including
as refugees and internally displaced persons, and that
they are increasingly targeted by combatants and other
armed elements.

Durable peace and reconciliation are heavily
compromised if the perpetrators of such acts are not
brought to justice. The Security Council therefore has a
vital role to play in ensuring that targeted measures are
taken to protect women and girls from rape and other
forms of sexual violence in conflict situations and that
there is no impunity for such acts.

The referral of the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) was a landmark
decision, both legally and politically. It was a strong
message by the Security Council that the international
community will not tolerate impunity for the most
serious crimes under international law, including
gender-related crimes. We would like to encourage the
Council to continue to consider the ICC as a policy
option. Referrals to the ICC must, however, be
accompanied by sustained political support from the
Council through all phases of the judicial proceedings,
and they must in some situations be accompanied by
other substantive measures.

Within the United Nations system, programmes
have been developed to build the leadership and
peacemaking capacities of women at all stages of
conflict and emergence from conflict. My Government
has been financing relevant activities by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).
There is ample evidence that women are very
active in informal peace processes. In spite of these
developments, the official presence of women in such

processes is still minimal. There continues to be a lack
of political will to recognize women's contributions to
peace and to acknowledge their right to participate
effectively in peace negotiations. Strengthening
women's capacity as peacemakers must be pursued in
parallel with increasing women's participation.
Creating awareness of peace negotiations as a tool for
achieving gender equality is essential.

Against this background, we have consistently
and for long years been advocating the appointment of
women as special representatives and envoys of the
Secretary-General. We fully support the call addressed
to the Secretary-General by the Women Leaders'
Working Group on 19 June 2007 to establish, as a
matter of high priority, a mechanism to increase the
number of women considered for leading United
Nations positions, including as heads of peace
operations. Like others before me, I welcome in this
context the appointment of our former colleague,
Ambassador Ellen Margrethe Loj of Denmark as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Liberia. Such appointments can play a catalytic role in
promoting the full potential of women as peacemakers.

This debate presents another opportunity to
promote the effective, coherent and systematic
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) through
better accountability mechanisms. Member States and
civil society organizations have highlighted in the past
the need for the Council to develop a reporting and
monitoring mechanism to ensure the systematic
integration and implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in its own work. Such a mechanism could
address implementation gaps at the international level,
such as inadequate monitoring and reporting on
implementation by field missions, particularly on grave
violations of human rights, such as sexual violence,
and it could improve the information basis for Council
deliberations.

It could also strengthen the accountability for the
implementation of the resolution at the national level,
while allowing for better informed definition of
relevant capacity-building needs. We support this idea
and call upon the Council to endow itself with more
effective oversight on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), including through the establishment of a
monitoring mechanism with appropriate leadership to
ensure its active engagement with all aspects of the
work of the Council.

We believe that, after seven years, the time has
come to realize the establishment of such a mechanism.
Strengthening the protection of women and girls in
conflict-affected societies from rape and other forms of
sexual violence should be important enough to
translate the many calls for the creation of such a
mechanism into concrete action.

