Ms. Leoteau (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to commend and thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing, and thank
Mr. Fedotov, Mr. Hyland and Ms. Elman for their
important contributions.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of measures to counter trafficking
in persons (S/2016/949) has revealed that traffickers
mainly take advantage of women, young people and
boys and girls, in particular those traveling alone,
making that group account for 79 per cent ofthe victims
of a terrible crime that affects all countries. Armed
conflicts have encouraged the trafficking in persons
within the context of large migrant flows, leading to
serious consequences such as early child marriage.
Panama supports the eradication of child marriage in
all contexts, not only in conflict situations. Some 60 per
cent of the victims of trafficking are foreigners from
the country with which they identify and the majority
are migrants for sexual exploitation, forced labour and
modern-day slavery.

One of the major challenges in prosecuting and
condemning the crime of trafficking is the collection
of data and proof based on which we can share good
practices in an effort to overcome the growing and
worrisome situation to which we can all relate when
crossing borders. On 15 December 2000, Panama signed
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime - the Palermo Convention - and its
protocols. Because it understands its vulnerabilities as
a transit route and a country of destination for migrants,
Panama now has a National Commission against
Trafficking in Persons, an inter-institutional structure
that provides various types of care required by victims.

Panama believes that the Security Council could
request that States Members of the United Nations
comply with the Convention and proceed to the next
stage. We have come to a standstill on the regulatory
framework. We must engage in more vigorous
prosecution of traffickers and ensure that judicial
systems in each country enforce the corresponding
sentences. To that end, we must increase resource
allocations and secure evidence, which is even more
difficult in conflict situations and when dealing with
terrorist groups and their actions.

We should also strengthen the Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, in particular
for women and children, established by the General
Assembly; not to revictimize or punish the people
who have endured that crime, but rather to support
and help them, guarantee their security and accept
them in the countries to which they have been taken.
We must insist on, promote and monitor the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy towards sexual offenses,
as a clear sign of the serious commitment and political
will of all its constituent bodies and staff as well as its
Member States.

At several open debates, we suggested that joint
efforts that can be carried out by, for example, the
Security Council and the Human Rights Council,
should be strengthened, through the use of tools,
such as the Universal Periodic Review, from which
the implementation of the legal framework for the
prevention, treatment and elimination of trafficking
in persons in armed conflict should be monitored.
We would like to make special mention of the work
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
whose regional headquarters for Latin America and the
Caribbean is in Panama. It works to support States in the
difficult tasks of preventing and punishing trafficking
in persons at the global level. Likewise, we would
like to make special mention of non-governmental
organizations whose team members risk their lives,
rescuing, helping and giving a new opportunity to
victims of trafficking, in particular those working in
conflict and post-conflict zones.

It is important for us to continue to review the
prevention and prosecution of the crime of trafficking,
as recommended by States within the context of
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and including the theme in our national
voluntary reviews.

