Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): At the outset, let
me join previous speakers in commending you,
Madame, for organizing this open debate on a very
important matter. Georgia aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union earlier in the debate.

Georgia welcomes the adoption of resolution
1960 (2010) and is proud to be its co-sponsor. We also
welcome the establishment of UN Women and the
appointment of Ms. Bachelet as the first leader of that
body. We are convinced that, under her able leadership,
there will be firm progress in solving problems that are
on the women and peace and security agenda.
Despite some achievements and the fact that the
issue of women's rights and peace and security has
been on the agenda of the Security Council and other
relevant United Nations institutions for a decade, we
all recognize that serious challenges remain in
transforming those positive developments into tangible
results. Indeed, women and children are the worst-
affected segment of populations in modern conflicts, in
which they are influenced by the degradation of their
living conditions and fundamental rights.

The violation of the rights of women is one of the
principal characteristics of various conflicts across the
world in both conflict and post-conflict situations.
Unfortunately, 10 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the plight of women and girls
in armed conflict is still dire. Regrettably, the war in
Georgia in August 2008 was no exception in that sense.
It resulted in the gross violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including violence against
women.

Due to the sensitive nature of the crime, rapes are
frequently underreported, especially in war.
Nonetheless, the rape, torture and mutilation of ethnic
Georgian women were by registered by various
international and non-governmental organizations,
including the independent fact-finding mission headed
by Swiss diplomat Heidi Tagliavini. The documented
cases unequivocally prove the involvement of
occupying forces from a neighbouring country and its
proxies in serious violations of women's rights,
including sexual violence and humiliating treatment,
among the other instruments of ethnic cleansing that
we have witnessed on the occupied territories of
Georgia since the early 1990s.

Even today, the rights and freedoms of Georgian
women are jeopardized in the occupied territories of
Georgia. Human rights watchdogs and international
missions are banned from monitoring the humanitarian
and human rights situation in the occupied territories.
As a result, this situation, which has deteriorated,
remains off the United Nations radar. The continuation
of the current state of affairs cannot be tolerated by the
international community.

Finally, let me reassure the Council that Georgia
supports the efforts of the entire United Nations family
to prevent, and eventually eradicate, violence against
women.
