Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): At the outset, I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
under the United Kingdom presidency, on women,
peace and security, with a focus on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1820 (2008). Croatia
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later on
behalf of the European Union.

We also express our deep appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his first progress report pursuant
to that resolution (S/2009/362). We view it as an
important initial road map for our future work on that
issue. We further perceive the Secretary-General's
leadership on that issue as vital to ensure that political
momentum is further galvanized on behalf of
resolution 1820 (2008), with a view to urgently
addressing outstanding key challenges that continue to
hinder progress in combating sexual violence in
conflict-affected situations.

The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008)
represented a significant follow-up to the Council's
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Under resolution
1820 (2008), we expressed our political will to further
advance efforts to prevent and respond to the use of
sexual violence in conflict-related situations. Croatia
was an ardent supporter of resolution 1820 (2008) from
its conceptual phase to its ultimate adoption, and we
continue to reiterate our full support for the
resolution's unequivocal implementation. In that
respect, we reiterate our call on all parties to armed
conflict to strictly adhere to relevant international law.

Despite the wide-scale support shown for
resolution 1820 (2008) last year, the Secretary-
General's report serves as an important reminder that
its overall implementation remains weak and that the
deliberate and targeted use of sexual violence against
women and girls in conflict-affected situations
continues to be a key challenge of our time.
Furthermore, in certain parts of the world, such as the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, widespread
and systematic sexual violations are being perpetrated
systematically and at levels of such brutality that they
defy belief. Also disturbing to us is the increasing trend
of unrestrained accompanying violations against
victims, such as their abduction, enforced prostitution
and enslavement.

Croatia, too, bears its own painful reminders that
sexual violence in conflict-related situations is not a
relic of the distant past. Indeed, as the Secretary-
General points out in his report, we, too, experienced
first-hand the infliction of widespread and systematic
rape and sexual violence as a tactic of war to terrorize
and displace civilian populations in the 1990s. In that
respect, the particularity of the conflict in our region is
partially evidenced in the case law of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Croatia
therefore supports the systematic referral of serious
crimes, such as crimes against humanity, to the
International Criminal Court.
As part of our deliberations today, aimed at
strengthening the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008), we view the report of the Secretary-General as
having raised some significant implications for our
future work. It highlights important hurdles and gaps
that are keeping effective protection elusive and

preventing genuine change on the ground. In that
respect, we appreciate the Secretary-General's candour
as to the limitations of certain aspects of his report,
especially with regard to his specific concerns
regarding the collection of information on sexual
violence, as requested under resolution 1820 (2008).

Today's debate, and any possible future outcome,
will serve as an important litmus test as to the level of
our political determination to strengthen existing
efforts, including the elimination of prevailing
impunity in many conflict-affected situations.

The Secretary-General, in pointing to the urgency
and magnitude of the problem, has correctly
underscored the need for a mutually reinforcing
multisectoral response by the United Nations system
that must address this problem decisively in order to
ensure more effective protection and assistance for
victims. Here, the Security Council has an important
role to play. While we welcome measures already taken
to date by the United Nations towards the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008), we see the
need for a wider focus within the Council's own
agenda on issues related to the resolution than has so
far been the case.

Furthermore, the establishment of a regular
reporting cycle by the Secretary-General on resolution
1820 (2008) will be crucial to that process. Improving
the added value of such inputs will require the further
development of United Nations capacities in the
strategic collection and analysis of violations against
women and girls in conflict situations. Calls for the
establishment of a commission of inquiry, as outlined
in the report, warrant our serious consideration.

The monitoring of sexual violence can be further
strengthened by closer synergies with other existing
monitoring mechanisms. In this context, Croatia
strongly welcomes the adoption this week of resolution
1882 (2009), on children and armed conflict,
expanding the monitoring and reporting mechanism
trigger to include rape and other forms of sexual
violence. This will not only serve as an important
milestone for the children-and-armed-conflict agenda,
but also as a valuable complementary mechanism for
monitoring implementation of resolution 1820 (2008),
especially for young women up to the age of 18.

Croatia also believes that the revised aide-
memoire (S/PRST/2009/ 1, annex) adopted in January
on the protection of civilians, including women and
girls, affected by armed conflict will also facilitate our
future efforts towards achieving effective
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008).

We also join others who call for more to be done
at the field operation level to fill existing gaps,
especially through better integration of the gender
perspective in the peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
humanitarian arenas to strengthen mandates for the
protection of women. We continue to urge strengthened
female leadership in the field, with more female
engagement at all levels. Furthermore, gender equality
and respect for women's human rights must be at the
centre of all United Nations missions, with strict
adherence to the Organization's zero-tolerance policy
on sexual violence.

While Croatia will be looking to the United
Nations system to step up its efforts to implement the
relevant recommendations in the report, Member States
will also have to do their part. More needs to be done
to ensure full implementation of Member States'
commitments pursuant to resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1325 (2000).

Functioning national legal institutions need to be
established, underpinned by a strong normative
framework ensuring full gender equality and
inclusiveness, as well as endorsing women's political,
economic and human rights, in line with the United
Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, which marks its
thirtieth anniversary this year. Of paramount
importance is the elimination of existing climates of
impunity by enabling the rule of law to prevail.
Together, all of these elements will serve as strong
deterrents for future perpetrators.

Greater cooperation between the United Nations
and regional mechanisms can be further built upon to
support national efforts in this respect. Drawing on
previous peacebuilding experience and increasing the
number of deployable civilian experts, particularly
from affected regions and who possess the relevant
gender-perspective expertise and appropriate training,
could significantly contribute to overall efforts.
Furthermore, we must not overlook the value of the
capacity of local women to play a role as powerful
advocates for protection by changing attitudes on the
ground.

For hundreds of thousands of women and girls
worldwide, time is of the essence. Now is not the time
for us to be complacent in our efforts. Croatia hopes
that today's debate will pave the way for further timely
and concrete measures aimed at bringing about
effective implementation of the 1820 agenda, with the
ultimate aim of ending sexual violence in conflict-
affected and related situations.

