Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I welcome you, Madam President, to New York.
It is good to see you presiding over today's meeting.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres,
Major General Lund and Ms. Lorna Merekaje, the
representative of South Sudanese civil society, for
their briefings.

Since its inception 71 years ago, United Nations
peacekeeping has played an important role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Female
peacekeepers have always played an active role. They
serve in various mission areas, conducting patrols,
standing guard and treating patients. They bring hope
for peace to local people, in particular women and
children. I would like to pay tribute all of the women in
United Nations peacekeeping.

Chinese women have never been absent from
United Nations peacekeeping. I have a few photos
to share with members. The first one is of doctors in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, working and
fulfilling the mission's mandate. The second photo is of
female police officers in Liberia. The third photo shows
female medical workers treating patients in Libya.
There are several moving examples and stories in that
regard. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, at the
Chinese level 2 peacekeeping hospital there are three
Chinese female peacekeepers on their second tour in
the country. In the eyes of fellow peacekeepers and the
local people, they are truly like angels. They have treated
fellow peacekeepers in urgent need of care late at night.
They provide humanitarian assistance to local women
and children. Their outstanding medical skills, high
sense of responsibility and spirit of internationalism
have won them trust and acclaim.

In South Sudan, more than 10 female soldiers of
the Chinese infantry battalion perform tasks such as
security, long-distance patrols and joint search. They
also impart knowledge on hygiene and on preventing
epidemics in local communities. They engage with
school children and actively conduct civil-military
cooperation. A local orphan boy named James still
remembers, even today, that the name of the helpful
Chinese female peacekeeper is Yian.

In Haiti, a Chinese female police officer was
tragically killed in the line of duty, leaving a 4-year-old
child and an elderly parent. In her diary, she wrote,

"In this vast world, I may be as insignificant as a
feather. Nevertheless, in my small and humble way,
I wish to carry forward the aspiration for peace".

It is with that same aspiration that over the past 30 years
close to 1,000 Chinese female peacekeepers have left
for mission areas, without hesitation, to implement the
mandate for peace.

The main goal of United Nations peacekeeping is
to promote political settlement to conflicts and achieve
early peace and stability in mission areas. Therefore, all
our activities must serve that main goal. Strengthening
the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
requires joint efforts from the Security Council,
the Secretariat, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and host countries. The corresponding efforts
should be guided by the Charter of the United Nations
and the basic principles of peacekeeping. It requires a
holistic approach with efforts in various areas, such as
political settlement, logistical support, personnel safety
and partnership.

Conditions must be created to facilitate
broader women's participation in peacekeeping.
The international community should strengthen
communication to increase support for women's
participation in peacekeeping. In terms of the training
of peacekeepers, deployment and field operations, a
favourable environment should be created for women's
participation. Attention should be given to the national
conditions and situations in troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) so as to gradually increase women's
participation in peacekeeping. Such efforts can
begin with a trial to determine best practices before
such practices can be replicated on a broader scale.
Expanding women's participation in peacekeeping
requires the concerted efforts of all parties. Developed
countries should increase their participation in United
Nations peacekeeping and demonstrate their support
for women's participation with genuine action. The
Secretariat should increase its cooperation with TCCs
and develop targeted training plans to help TCCs
strengthen the relevant capacity-building. China
supports the Action for Peacekeeping initiative of
Secretary-General Guterres.

China is a major supporter of, and participant in,
peacekeeping. We are also a main TCC and financial
contributor to eight mission areas with Chinese
peacekeepers, of which Chinese female peacekeepers
serve in six, including in South Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mali. China is working not
only to expand the participation of Chinese female
peacekeepers but also to help other countries in that
regard. In recent years the Chinese Minister of Defence
and UN-Women have jointly organized international
training seminars for female peacekeeping officers
in Beijing to help increase women's participation in
peacekeeping operations. Together with the broader
international community, we will continue to actively
participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in order to make a greater contribution to world peace.

