Mrs. Arce de Jeannet (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We express our appreciation to the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, for his
briefing, and to Ms. Amy Smythe for her briefing on
her work with the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
which gives us a clearer idea of the resolution's impact
and possible impact on the ground, as we were able to
see when the Council mission to the Great Lakes
region visited Kinshasa and Bunia last June.

The experience gained by MONUC can be very
useful in addressing the specific needs of Liberian
women and children and can help the personnel of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia.

We also welcome Mrs. Angela King, the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on Gender Issues
and the Advancement of Women, and of Mrs. Noleen
Hayzer, Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women.

The third anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) gives us an opportunity to
speak once again on a matter to which the Government
of Mexico attaches great importance - the inclusion of
the gender perspective in dealing with armed conflict
and post-conflict situations, peace processes and
peacekeeping operations. We believe that the resolution
is part of a broader effort to include the gender
perspective in all areas of the work of the United
Nations, as well as within the Organization itself. This
is an effort that goes back to the World Conference on
Women held in Mexico in 1975.

That is the point of including gender perspective
in the areas of responsibility of the main organs of our
Organization. The line that separates peacekeeping
tasks and processes of peace consolidation and
development is so thin that this matter requires wider
cooperation and greater coordination between the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Secretariat.
In the past two years, my delegation has
participated actively in the group of friends of
resolution 1325 (2000), and it will continue to be a part
of it. As friends of the resolution, we have on more
than one occasion proposed the inclusion of references
to it, or of aspects related to it, in Security Council
draft resolutions on the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In the Fourth Committee of
the General Assembly and the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, we have consistently spoken
in favour of including the gender perspective in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

We support the creation of the position of Gender
Adviser within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, which represents, finally, an important
success. We hope that it will be filled as soon as
possible.

There has been some progress in including the
gender perspective in field missions, particularly with
regard to the inclusion of gender specialists. However,
relatively few missions have such personnel. We are
particularly surprised by the case of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which
needed a gender specialist for a long time. However,
we understand that that situation has just been
resolved. As we all know, the high level civil service
posts at the national, regional and international levels
continue to be dominated by men. This situation is
repeated in United Nations peacekeeping operations. It
is essential for Member States to propose more women
as candidates for the post of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. Currently, only one of them is a
woman.

At the same time, we must increase the
participation of women at the middle and operational
levels in peacekeeping operations, particularly in the
military and civilian police components.

Regarding the work of the Security Council,
much still remains to be done to ensure that the
question of gender is considered systematically when
framing resolutions and that it is dealt with as a central
matter in questions of international peace and security,
and not as a marginal issue.

Statistics provided by the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women
(OSAGI) demonstrates the work that remains to be
done. Only 14.7 per cent of Security Council
resolutions adopted since 2000 include any reference to
the topic. OSAGI also indicates that 67 per cent of the
reports of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council omit the gender question entirely, or perhaps
make a single reference. A profound change in mindset
is needed, on the part of both Member States of this
Organization and the Secretariat.

In the area of international law, an important
achievement is the classification under the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) of
certain acts of sexual violence as war crimes or crimes
against humanity. This is fully in keeping with the
contents of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
acknowledge that particular attention has been given to
gender equality in setting up the ICC.

The active participation of civil society
organizations has been a very positive element, not
only in the framing of resolution 1325 (2000), but also,
in particular, in the process that began once it was
adopted. Non-governmental organizations view that
resolution as a useful tool for promoting gender issues
within the context of armed conflicts, in peace
processes, in the post-conflict rebuilding of societies,
in the very important sphere of disarmament and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and
in our fight to eradicate the illicit traffic of small arms
and for the total elimination of antipersonnel mines.

It is important that in the follow-up to resolution
1325 (2000), the Security Council maintain good
channels of communication with non-governmental
organizations, particularly with those in countries or
regions where there is an intention to establish, or
where there already exist, United Nations peace
operations.

By way of conclusion, we would like to put
forward two suggestions. First, it is important for the
Security Council to consider the appropriateness of
setting up a mechanism to follow up the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
recommendations contained in the study carried out on
women, peace and security, by the Secretary-General
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
and in the study on women, war and peace
commissioned by the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM).

Secondly, perhaps an additional resolution could
be adopted on this topic of women and peace and
security, keeping in mind the fact that in October 2004
the Secretary-General will submit his second report
under this item. While it is true that resolution 1325
(2000) has not yet realized its full potential and indeed
that a great deal needs to be done to ensure its
implementation, we think a new resolution would serve
to update and supplement resolution 1325 (2000) and
keep the attention of the Security Council and the
attention of the membership of the United Nations at
large focused on this issue.

