Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his statement.
China welcomes the presence at today's debate of
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN
Women; Ms. Pillay, High Commissioner for Human
Rights; and the NGO representative, Ms. Balipou. We
listened attentively to all of their briefings.

Respecting and protecting women's rights and
interests is not only the epitome of the civilization and
progress of human society, but is also closely related
to world peace and development. The international
community should not only be concerned with
protecting women's safety and upholding their rights
and interests in conflict and post-conflict situations;
it should also devote attention to ensuring that women
can play their unique roles in peace processes.

In order to promote women truly shouldering their
peacekeeping roles and playing at important part in
peacebuilding processes, the various United Nations

bodies and entities should work in accordance with their
respective mandates, with a clear division oflabour and
as one. I wish to highlight the following four points.

First, it is national Governments that have the
primary responsibility to protect women's safety and
their rights and interests. The international community
should support the countries concerned in their efforts to
that end by providing constructive assistance. External
support should fully respect national sovereignty and,
in keeping with specific national conditions and needs,
focus on capacity-building and stepping up assistance,
with a View to helping the countries concerned
overcome financial and technical difficulties.

Secondly, the Security Council should play its
unique role fully, while strengthening its coordination
and cooperation with related organizations and
agencies. As the primary institution for maintaining
international peace and security, the Council should
focus on conflict prevention, dispute mediation and
post-conflict reconstruction so as to foster an enabling
political, security and rule-of-law environment for
safeguarding women's security, rights and interests.
The General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Human Rights Council, UN Women and
other United Nations agencies should discharge their
respective responsibilities while working closely with
one another with a View to generating synergies.

Thirdly, strengthening the rule of law represents
both an important link in post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts and an important foundation for safeguarding
and upholding women's rights and interests. To prevent
women from once again falling prey to various atrocities,
it is essential to ensure their equal participation in the
process of reforming the security and justice sectors,
while maintaining parallel progress on the tracks of the
rule of law, political and economic development and
national reconciliation, thus providing a comprehensive
guarantee for the respect and protection of women's
rights and interests.

Fourthly, the effective participation of women is
an important foundation for realizing sustainable peace
and social stability. Women should become important
participants in conflict prevention and mediation,
and they should enjoy adequate rights when it comes
to decision-making and participation in post-conflict
peacebuilding and national development. That is in
the interests of changing their vulnerable status, while
maintaining their rights and interests in practical terms.

Women's development is the foundation for truly
realizing their empowerment. The international
community should promote socioeconomic
development and thereby effectively enhance the status
of women and promote their positive contributions to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

