Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes you,
Mr. President, to the Security Council and thanks the
Spanish delegation for organizing this seminal debate.
We acknowledge the presence ofparticipating ministers
and welcome them to the Security Council.

Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General
for his abiding commitment to the cause of women, to
the Executive Director of UN-Women for her powerful
exposition, and to Ms. Lusenge, Ms. Murabit and
Ms. Mohammed for their courage and soul-searching
testimonials.

Nigeria welcomes the opportunity to reflect on
the broad progress made in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda 15 years after
the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000).
Periodic reviews of this nature could help in galvanizing
action and resources to address existing challenges
and gaps in advancing the role of women within the
context of the global peace and security architecture.
We also welcome the positive developments achieved
at the strategic and operational levels across the pillars
of prevention, participation, protection, relief and
recovery in implementing the women and peace and
security agenda.

Despite the significant achievements, significant
gaps and challenges remain. Those include the
leadership and political participation of women in
decision-making, women's involvement in peace
efforts to prevent and resolve conflict, insufficient
resources and funds, lack of disaggregated data, forced
displacement exacerbated by persistent armed conflict,
and continuing unprecedented levels of sexual violence
and assault. Meeting those challenges is critical to
making progress in the women and peace and security
agenda. It requires a multistakeholder approach
involving actors at the global, regional, subregional
and national levels. Communities, civil society and
individuals also have a pivotal role to play.

At the global level, the Security Council has
provided the leadership necessary to give impetus to
the women and peace and security agenda. Beginning
with resolution 1325 (2000), which set up the scaffold
for subsequent Council resolutions that utilized the
scaffold to build the women, peace and security agenda,
the Security Council has been at the forefront of that
evolving approach.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) has also played a constructive role in advancing
the women and peace and security agenda by promoting
the greater involvement of women in peacekeeping.
According to United Nations data, 29 per cent of the
6,800 international civilians working in special political
missions and peacekeeping missions are women. That
is highly significant. Even more significant is the
fact that women lead five peace operations as Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General.

In addition, three all-female police units are
deployed in three United Nations missions around the
world. According to DPKO, the participation of women
as peacekeepers provides a greater sense of security to
women and children, improves access to local women and
makes United Nations peacekeepers more approachable
to women. In view of the spectacular challenges that
women face in post-conflict situations, those are highly
significant considerations. We commend DPKO for the
importance it attaches to the situation of women in the
context of peacekeeping operations.
Other important actors within the United Nations
system are UN-Women and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. We take this opportunity to pay special
tribute to the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for their astute leadership
and untiring efforts to advance the women, peace and
security agenda.

At the regional level in Africa, the African Union
(AU) has been a valid instrument and platform for the
advancement of the women, peace and security agenda.
In January 2014, the African Union Commission
signed the Framework of Cooperation Concerning the
Prevention and Response to Conflict-related Sexual
Violence in Africa, with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Its major focus is on preventing
and responding to sexual violence in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

The agreement complements the ongoing efforts of
the African Union Peace and Security Council, which
is working to institute a code of conduct and a zero-
tolerance policy that clearly outlines the AU's strong
position against sexual violence and exploitation by AU
troops. The agreement strengthens the collaboration
and common commitment of the African Union and
the United Nations to combat impunity and promote
accountability, implement capacity-building and
training programmes, foster better coordination,
national ownership and leadership, facilitate the
provision of multisectoral services, and alleviate the
stigma and trauma of victims.

The African Union Agenda 2063, which was
adopted by African heads of State and Government in
Addis Ababa in January, is designed to build a more
prosperous and peaceful continent. The Agenda places
particular emphasis on the engagement of women and
youth in the continent's development.

At the subregional level in West Africa, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has been a major driver of the women,
peace and security agenda. In collaboration with the
United Nations Office for West Africa, in September
2010 ECOWAS developed a subregional and integrated
plan of action for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan of action emphasizes the importance
of the role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution, mediation and peacebuilding efforts, and in
the rebuilding of post-conflict societies.
ECOWAS has put in place very strong mechanisms
regarding the role of women in conflict prevention
and management, such as the Protocol on Conflict
Prevention, Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping
and Security and the Supplementary Protocol on
Democracy and Good Governance. Those mechanisms
serve as the basis for the ECOWAS conflict-prevention
framework. The women, peace and security component
of that framework aims at consolidating women's
role, participation and impact at all stages of conflict
management, including humanitarian provisions, while
reinforcing various national and regional mechanisms
for protecting and promoting them.

At the national level, in August 2013 Nigeria
launched a national action plan to fully implement
the relevant provisions of resolution 1325 (2000). The
plan reflects the federal Government's commitment
to ensuring the security of women and girls during
armed conflict and enhancing their active and direct
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
We are also committed to the provisions of resolution
1820 (2008) on ending acts of sexual violence against
women in conflict situations.

In concert with our neighbours Chad, Cameroon,
the Niger and Benin, we are cooperating within the
framework of a multinational task force to fight the Boko
Haram insurgency, which is targeting women and girls.
We are resolutely determined to defeat the terrorists.
Because of the transnational nature of terrorism, we
take this opportunity to call on all people and nations
of good will to renew their pledge to support the fight
against that menace.

We acknowledge the contributions of civil society
organizations as partners in peacebuilding, prevention
and the management and resolution of disputes. The
Nigerian Government will continue to engage them as
key stakeholders and partners in the women and peace
and security agenda.

Nigeria remains fully and firmly committed to
the promotion and protection of the rights of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations. We
shall work assiduously to enhance the participation
of women in peace and security initiatives. We are
determined to reinforce and implement the principles
of resolution 1325 (2000) and, within that context, to
address the factors that impact negatively on the lives
of women and girls.

