Mrs. Dakhil (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We wish them every success in their task. I would
also like to thank the Government of my country for
providing me with the opportunity to participate in
this debate. I express my appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his annual report on sexual violence during
armed conflicts for the period of January to December
2014 (S/2015/203). Moroever, I wish to commend the
important part played by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the outstanding role that office
plays in that context.

I would like to make several remarks in the context
of the Secretary-General's report.

First, we fully concur with paragraph 28 of the
report, as the year 2014 was one of the bloodiest years
in Iraq since 2003, particularly the second half of that
year, when the entire Iraqi population began to suffer
from the brutal attacks launched by the enemies of
humankind and civilization - namely, the terrorists of
the criminal group Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). That included every manner of attack on the
lives, security and dignity of Iraqi citizens from every
social sphere, as well as threats to the very existence of
Iraqi society and its safety, security, stability and the
peaceful coexistence of its components. Along with the
numerous other criminal and savage acts committed by
ISIL against innocent Iraqis, which in terms of their
criminality and violence deserve to be considered
crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide based
on prevailing legal norms, sexual Violence was one of
the central components used by ISIL. The facts indicate
that Violence and sexual attacks form a significant part
of ISIL's criminal doctrine, which includes all forms
of sexual violence, including kidnapping, rape, sexual
slavery, genital mutilation and trafficking in persons
for sexual purposes, as well as forced marriage, forced
pregnancy and forced abortion.

Today, ISIL's barbarity defies understanding. Its
practices and criminality have exposed the group's
intent to take humankind back to ancient times, when
human dignity was regularly trampled upon and humans
were bought and sold like merchandise in the market.
The criminals of ISIL have established markets for the
sale of women and children and have set prices for the
women who are ISIL's victims, and especially members
of the Yazidi sect, in blatant contravention of all norms
and dictates of both divine and worldly laws.

The Iraqi Government has taken a number of steps
and adopted a number of resolutions. To the best of
its abilities, the Iraqi Parliament has issued a number
of laws to promote and improve the situation of Iraqi
women and guarantee their enjoyment of all their civil,
political, social, economic and cultural rights. The
Iraqi Government was among the first to respond to the
requirements of resolution 1325 (2000), concerning the
promotion and protection of women. We have adopted
a national action plan to implement that resolution and
have launched two national strategies in that regard,
the first for the promotion of women and the second
for combating violence against women and for taking
the necessary steps in that regard. That makes Iraq the
first State in the Middle East to begin implementing
the resolution. Despite all the suffering that Iraq
has endured at the hands of terrorists, Iraq today is
continuing to implement the national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That is
in addition to a number of special measures to respond
to the new, urgent needs resulting from ISIL's attacks,
particularly against women. The Iraqi Government has
sought, to the best of its abilities, to provide a rapid
response in order to offer relief and assistance to the
survivors. The regional Government of Kurdistan has
also formed a special committee focused on genocide
that seeks to receive and assist female survivors. Both
Governments are also assisting internally displaced
persons and providing them with humanitarian
assistance.

Based on the foregoing, I would like to seize
the two opportunities presented to me - that of my
presence here and the fact that today is the Yazidi New
Year, an occasion we cannot truly celebrate when such
a large number of Yazidi women have taken hostage and
kidnapped. Still, I seize this opportunity to call on the
international community once gain, as Member States
and as international organizations, to continue to assist
the Iraqi Government win its fight against terrorism in
order to achieve the liberation of the areas controlled
now by that criminal group and to hold accountable its
members as well as those who have provided it with
support. I call on the international community to assist
with the rehabilitation of the victims of terrorism,
particularly the Victims of sexual violence, especially
women, and to rehabilitate them psychologically,
providing them with the necessary skills to guarantee
their return to their central role in Iraqi society and to
help the country prosper.

