Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed and Acting
Special Representative Dieng for their powerful
briefings this morning. We are also honoured by
Ms. Jaf's presence in the Security Council today, and
we deeply appreciate her moving and inspirational
testimony on behalf of the women, men, girls and boys
who have suffered from sexual violence in conflict. As
a voice for civil society, her voice is important for all
of us to hear.

In December 2016, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2331 (2016), condemning sexual violence
and trafficking in persons committed by terrorists and
armed groups. The resolution reflected a sobering truth
about conflict today: rape is a weapon of war. Fighters
are not just using guns, mortars and rockets in their
battles; what we see now is a systematic use of rape to
decimate communities and to force them to surrender
or to flee. It is a sick and twisted reality.

The reports of rape and sexual violence from
conflict zones are shocking, but they have yet to move
the Security Council to act in response. That is why
reports of sexual violence in conflict continue and
even grow year after year. In order to fully implement
resolution 2331 (2016) and help end these atrocities, we
as a Council should focus on three things.

First, we should consistently recognize and
condemn the impact of sexual violence on international
peace and security. In South Sudan, for example,
in December 2016, United Nations human rights
investigators said that rape was being used as a tool
for ethnic cleansing and that sexual violence in South
Sudan had reached "epic proportions". In January 2017,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
reported that refugees arriving from the Equatoria
region of South Sudan had cited rape and sexual abuse
of women and girls as one of their primary reasons
for fleeing. There were even reports that militias and
armed groups were using rape as a sort oftax to be paid
by female refugees fleeing the country.

Where rape is being used as a tactic of war, it is
often public and committed in front of mass audiences,
including family members and children. One refugee
from South Sudan, when describing what happened to
her while trying to escape the conflict, said:

"We hired a driver to take us to the Oraba border
point. When we reached Kimba, there were two
soldiers. They told the women to get out, to remove
their clothes and lie down. The children saw their
mothers get raped."

Clearly, the motive behind these horrific public rapes is
to terrorize entire communities and to traumatize future
generations. There can be no doubt that in South Sudan
the epidemic of rape and sexual assault exacerbates the
threat to international peace and security.

Secondly, in responding to sexual violence, the
Security Council must seek to hold those responsible
accountable for their actions and call on Member
States to ensure that victims and survivors receive
comprehensive care, as has been noted by other speakers.
Unfortunately, we know that the overwhelming
majority of victims and survivors may never receive
justice. Just as armed conflict can destroy societies, it
can also destroy the very institutions that should hold
those responsible to account, and, in some places, the
police who are supposed to investigate sexual violence
are actually reported as the perpetrators.

Rebuilding courts and reforming law enforcement
are never easy tasks, but we need to give victims of
sexual violence access to justice; otherwise the deep
scars caused by rape in armed conflict will be difficult
if not impossible to heal. We appreciate that, even with
a relatively small team, the United Nations Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict has
travelled to conflict zones to engage Governments and
negotiate agreements intended to curb such attacks.
That work, while it may take time, is vital.

We are also encouraged that the Council recognizes
that victims and survivors face challenges in accessing
the medical, psychosocial and economic support they
need to rebuild their lives. In March, for example,
our resolution on the conflict in the Lake Chad basin
(resolution 2349 (2017)) included a strong call for
Governments and humanitarian partners to provide
rapid access for medical and social services for victims
of sexual violence. Survivors need such access to heal
and to reintegrate into society.

Thirdly, and finally, I call upon members of the
Security Council to set an example for the international
community by advancing the women and peace and
security agenda at home and in their engagement
abroad. As the President of the Council noted, we know
that an essential element of preventing sexual violence
in the first place starts with empowering women to be
leaders in building and maintaining peace.

For our part, the United States will not waver in
its commitment to ending sexual violence in conflict,
provide care for victims and hold perpetrators
accountable. We will continue to work with our friends
and allies to address this scourge, and we call on all
States Members of the United Nations to join us in this
vital endeavour.

I agree with Mina Jaf that it is not enough to simply
condemn acts of sexual violence in conflict; she is
right: everyone here today is responsible for ending it
and for bringing the perpetrators to justice.

