Mr. Ebner (Austria): Austria associates itself
with the statement made earlier by the representative of
France on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
welcomes the focus of this open debate on the
participation of women.

The inclusion of women in peace processes not
only ensures that their concerns are addressed in peace
negotiations, but also strengthens their position in the
subsequent post-conflict phase. Women are thus in a
stronger position in national post-conflict recovery
efforts. Figures on women's participation in peace
negotiations in recent years, however, show that we
must significantly increase our efforts.

In light of the recommendations made by the
Women's Empowerment Network last year, we are
encouraged by the Secretary-General's increasing
appointments of women as special representatives and
to leading positions in the Secretariat. We hope to see
more female appointments in the near future. At the
same time, Austria would like to urge special
representatives and envoys to make full use of the
potential of women in peace processes and conflict
resolution.

We strongly encourage United Nations special
envoys and special representatives, as well as Security
Council missions, in their contacts with local
authorities, to stress the importance of gender
mainstreaming and to lobby for the active involvement
of local women in peace and reconciliation processes.

We further encourage peacekeeping operations to
hold regular meetings with women representatives to
assess specific issues related to their situation. A
gender checklist for EU peacekeeping operations,
initiated during the Austrian Presidency of the EU in
2006, has successfully integrated the main objectives
of resolution 1325 (2000) into a coherent planning
framework. Many elements of the EU gender checklist
can serve as a model for peace missions in the
framework of the United Nations and regional
organizations.

It is also widely recognized that female staff play
a distinctive role and have a positive operational
impact in peacekeeping operations. That is true for all
aspects of the mandate of peace operations, but in
particular for sensitive tasks such as in the aftermath of
sexual violence or when it comes to screening of
women ex-combatants. Additional efforts are needed to
attract more women to peacekeeping operations, since,
according to a report of the Secretary-General of July
2008, only 2.2 per cent of military personnel and
7.6 per cent of civilian police are female.

Austria is committed to the objectives of
resolution 1325 (2000). Our activities are firmly based
on a national action plan adopted in August 2007. In
line with the Austrian national action plan, a first
progress report, which was adopted recently,
highlighted concrete achievements during the first year
with regard to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) at the national, regional and international levels.
That ongoing process of monitoring and evaluation
contributes to strengthening cross-departmental
cooperation.

One important aspect is training. In 2008,
predeployment training on human rights, with a
particular focus on the objectives of resolution 1325
(2000), has been undertaken for all for Austrian male
and female soldiers participating in the EU's military
operation in the Republic of Chad. This month, the
Austrian Study Center for Peace and Conflict
Resolution held its first specialization course on
women and armed conflict, which brought together
experts involved in, or preparing for, various United
Nations and regional peacebuilding efforts.

The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
should be used to define future priorities. On several
occasions over the past year, and most recently in her
statement during the general debate of the General
Assembly, Austrian Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik
proposed a 10-year review by the United Nations of
resolution 1325 (2000), culminating in a review
08-57549
conference in 2010. Her initiative has already received
broad support, in particular from women leaders, who,
following a meeting in Brussels hosted by
Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner in March 2008,
invited Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to convene a
ministerial-level meeting in 2010 to review the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
reinvigorate the commitment to tackling outstanding
issues. Austria stands ready to work with the Secretary-
General and all interested countries and stakeholders to
use the tenth anniversary to identify gaps and
challenges and to reinforce the commitment of all
States, the entire United Nations system and regional
organizations to effectively implement the
undertakings of resolution 1325 (2005).

