Ms. Rehn (Finland): It is a great honour for me
to address the Security Council on resolution 1325
(2000), a resolution to which I personally have devoted
so much time and passion.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The following countries align
themselves with this statement: Bulgaria, Romania,
Turkey, Croatia, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia, Iceland, Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova.

On behalf of the European Union, I would like to
extend my thanks to the Japanese presidency for
holding this open debate.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is, in
many ways, a milestone in the recognition of the role
of women in peace consolidation and has been
welcomed by women all over the world. However, six
years after the resolution's adoption, there are still
serious gaps in its implementation. We need to analyse
these gender gaps, prioritize women's role throughout
the peace process and show leadership which ensures
women's empowerment, participation and protection.

The European Union believes that it is critical to
move from marginalization to action. We encourage
increased attention to the equal participation of women
from the first stages of negotiating peace through
reconstruction and political participation.

The number of women in higher posts in United
Nations peace operations remains low. We urge the
Secretary-General to continue to identify and nominate
women for senior posts. We also urge all other parties
to increase the number of women staff in the areas of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. We must also engage
in gender-specific institutional reform to make the
institutions more responsive to women.

Post-conflict reconstruction provides an
opportunity for legal and justice reform. The legal
framework and the judicial system should better
protect the rights of women and girls, ensure their
access to justice and remove gender-discriminatory
statutes and practices concerning rights to land,
property and inheritance. Promoting the rule of law and
true access to justice for women is crucial.

The European Union reiterates its support for the
establishment of a rule of law assistance unit and
requests that the unit be established without further
delay. We hope that the unit, once established, will
adopt a strong gender focus.

The EU emphasizes that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes should
include women and girls. Reconstituted police and
armed forces should seek gender balance and should be
reformed to introduce gender equality. We also believe
that gender should be an integral part of security-sector
reform programmes.

We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission
provides a unique forum for strong institutional and
strategic leadership and prioritization regarding the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We are very
pleased to see that the role of women and resolution
1325 (2000) were included in the Commission's first
country-specific meetings. The EU believes that gender
should be incorporated into every aspect of the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office. The Commission should also ensure
open and inclusive participation and representation of
women's organizations and civil society in its work.

The EU strongly believes in gender equality as a
prerequisite for peace and security. Resolution 1325
(2000) is currently being implemented also within the
context of the European Security and Defence Policy
(ESDP). The EU is committed to increasing women's
representation at all decision-making levels and in
peacekeeping operations, increasing the dialogue with
local and international women's groups, protecting
women and girls affected by conflict and incorporating
a gender perspective into all ESDP operations.

Gender inclusion has to start at the highest levels,
and it has to be done systematically. The EU has
adopted a checklist for gender in ESDP operations. In
addition, all the operations are bound by the Generic
Standards of Behaviour, which prohibit any
involvement in sexual exploitation, trafficking in
women or prostitution. We believe that all
peacekeeping personnel should act in an exemplary
manner, and we encourage the training of all United
Nations personnel, at all levels.

Armed conflicts have increasingly been
characterized by the use of sexual violence against
women and girls. Violence against women in and after
armed conflict constitutes a grave human rights
violation. The EU, in line with decisions of the
Security Council, strongly condemns all gender-based
violence in situations of armed conflict and further
condemns all violations of the human rights of women
and girls.

We urge that impunity be ended for all
perpetrators by strengthening the legal and judicial
systems and by enacting and enforcing legislation to
ensure investigation, prosecution and punishment of
perpetrators. The EU stresses that impunity must be
excluded from all war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and gender-based crimes, and it reiterates its
support for the International Criminal Court in this
regard.

The response to gender-based violence requires
long-term and coordinated efforts, including
protection, health care, education and psycho-social,
social, economic and legal support. The EU also
underscores the importance of preventing gender-based
violence.

In line with the proposal outlined in the recent
report of the Secretary-General on all forms of
violence against women (A/61/122/Add.1), the EU
supports the establishment of monitoring mechanisms
within the Security Council to address the prevention
and redress of violence against women in armed
conflict.

The European Union takes note of the report of
the Secretary-General on the review of the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan (S/2006/770). We
encourage strengthened coordination between United
Nations agencies, both at Headquarters and in the field,
and urge the development of a regular monitoring and
reporting mechanism for the Action Plan.

Incorporating resolution 1325 (2000) into the
Security Council's work in order to ensure a gender-
sensitive approach in all such work is crucial, but there
is often a lack of understanding of the concept of
gender mainstreaming. The EU therefore welcomes the
current efforts by the United Nations and Member
States to train permanent missions and Security
Council members on how to translate the resolution
into concrete action. Additional measures to include
resolution 1325 (2000) in the work of the Security
Council should also be considered, such as establishing
a working group or focal point.

Member States need to take responsibility for the
success of resolution 1325 (2000) through ensuring
that it is integrated into national policy and training
programmes. A number of EU member States, as well
as other countries, have developed national action
plans on the implementation of the resolution. We
encourage countries to develop such plans, as well as
to apply a broad gender mainstreaming approach across
government.

Finally, the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) is closely linked to achieving
gender equality and equal participation by women at
all levels of society. In post-conflict societies, indeed,
women constitute much more than half of the
population. Women are entitled to an active role in
rebuilding their society.

