Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the convening of this
open meeting. I wish to thank all the briefers for their
statements.

In areas of armed conflict, women and children are
always vulnerable and subject to all kinds of violence,
harm and isolation. The international community is
urgently called on to provide them with assistance.
Recently, terrorist organizations, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram, are carrying
out criminal activities, such as human trafficking in
the Middle East and Africa, further jeopardizing the
rights and interests of women and children, and leading
to the deterioration of their living environment. The
international community should closely coordinate and
carry out joint efforts to step up the protection of women
and children in conflicts. I should like to highlight the
following points.

First, the sovereignty of the countries involved
should be respected and their role should be leveraged.
The countries involved have the primary responsibility
to protect women and children in their countries
and to combat human trafficking. The international
community should, on the basis of respecting the
sovereignty of countries involved, provide constructive
support and assist the countries involved in stepping up
their capacity-building in counter-terrorism and border
control so as to maintain stability and tranquillity in the
country and the region.

Secondly, an integrated approach should be taken
to addressing both the symptoms and the root causes.
The international community should strengthen
its cooperation in effectively combating criminal
activities, such as human trafficking, and in providing
comprehensive security guarantees and humanitarian
assistance to women and children in conflict areas. It
should also vigorously advance political processes and
promote national reconciliation and resolve differences
through dialogue and consultation so as to eradicate
the root causes of armed conflicts and create a stable
external environment for the protection of women and
children.

Thirdly, priority should be given to further counter-
terrorism efforts. Terrorism is a grave security threat
to the international community. Human trafficking has
become a source offinancing for terrorist organizations.
The international community should fully implement
the Council's counter-terrorism resolutions, strengthen
coordination and cooperation to form synergy in
combating terrorism, fully cut off the financing
channels of terrorist organizations and stop the cross-
border movements of terrorists, and resolutely combat
any terrorist and criminal activities that challenge the
foundation of human civilization.

Fourthly, we should strengthen cooperation to
create synergy among various mechanisms. The
United Nations, the Security Council, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UN-Women
should leverage their strengths and enhance their
coordination, based on their respective mandates, so as
to form international synergy in combatting criminal
activities, including human trafficking, and provide
comprehensive protection for the rights of women and
children in conflicts.

