Ms. Pajevie (Montenegro): I would like to thank
the Peruvian presidency for organizing this timely
open debate on preventing sexual violence in conflict
through empowerment, gender equality and access to
justice and for preparing an informative concept note
(S/2018/311, annex). I also thank the briefers for their
valuable inputs to the debate.

My country fully associates itself with the
statements made by the observer of the European
Union and by the representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
However, I would like to make some additional remarks
in my national capacity.

We live in an increasingly divided world, torn by
conflict and political breakdowns, where women and
girls are at a heightened risk of all forms of gender-
based violence, from rape to assault, domestic violence
and early marriage, as well as exploitation by smugglers.
Montenegro welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/250), which paints a disturbing
picture concerning country situations. Today we need
to consider which practical steps should be taken to
meet our commitments, to protect women from the
widespread occurrence of sexual violence in armed
conflict by State and non-State actors, to promote
the role of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflict and to ensure the building of stable and
just societies.

Preventing conflict-related sexual violence
through empowerment, gender equality and justice
is central to peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
reconciliation. We must support the ability of women
to influence policies that promote peacebuilding and
development and reduce inequality. As experience
shows, female experts can provide additional channels
of communication to local communities that are not
open to male soldiers. They help to build trust and
confidence. They can attend to the specific needs
of women and girls, including with regard to basic
services, health care and education. Women's voices
must be heard and women must have ownership of the
policies that affect them and all of us.

Montenegro supports international efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security, which acknowledges the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on women and children. We
adopted a national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) for the period 2017-2018.
We actively participate in the work of the Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network.
In order to empower women soldiers, increase female
representation and support the recruitment of female
officers and gender training, last year Montenegro
contributed to the NATO Jordan III Trust Fund. We will
soon send an experienced gender adviser, responsible for
advice and operational support on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), to NATO headquarters.

Montenegro was among the first five countries
signatories to the Council of Europe Istanbul Convention
on preventing and combating violence against women
and domestic violence. We submitted the first report on
its implementation last year. We support the European
Union Spotlight Initiative to end violence against
women and girls, which was launched in September
last year and is being implemented worldwide with the
United Nations.

It is unacceptable for crimes of sexual violence not
to be reported and condemned and for those responsible
not be held accountable. The United Nations, other
international bodies, Governments and civil society
must all play their part in ensuring a response so as
to eliminate sexual violence in conflict areas around
the world.

We support international peace operations as an
instrument to ensure respect for human rights and
to build sustainable institutions in conflict areas.
Nowadays, United Nations peacekeeping operations
are more focused on protecting civilians than on
monitoring ceasefires. That is why peace operations
should use new technology to strengthen their capacity.
In preparing Montenegrin soldiers to take part in peace
operations and activities, our Ministry of Defence
conducts regular training sessions on preventing sexual
violence in conflict.

Montenegro strongly condemns cases of sexual
exploitation in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
as that criminal activity and abuse have no place under
any circumstances in a United Nations flagship activity.
Zero tolerance and zero impunity must prevail as our
only option in order not to tarnish the credibility of the
United Nations.

At the international level, the Security Council
has an important role to play, including through the
sanctions regime. We call on the Security Council
to explicitly include sexual violence as a designation
criterion within the United Nations sanctions regimes
where such crimes are persistently perpetrated.

Survivors of sexual violence must receive adequate
support in order to alleviate their suffering and to assist
their reintegration into communities without prejudice
or stigma, which requires education and engagement.

We need to redouble our efforts to prevent conflict-
related sexual violence through the empowerment of
women and by supporting gender equality and justice
at all levels. No perpetrator should be above the law and
no survivor should be neglected.

