Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): I will refrain from offering
congratulations but you know, Madam President, that
we are very happy to see you preside over the Security
Council. You can be assured of our full support.

We fully associate ourselves with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.

Resolution 1325 (2000), along with the subsequent
women and peace and security resolutions, affirms
the Security Council's responsibility and commitment
to strengthening women's meaningful participation,
protection and rights across the span of the conflict
cycle. In the past almost two decades, this discourse
has shifted significantly. By abandoning the perception
of women as victims, the international community has
recognized their crucial role as first responders, agents
of change and rebuilders of shattered communities. The
root causes of women's chronic under-representation
in peace talks, and, broadly, in the security sector,
include discriminatory laws and practices, institutional
obstacles, gender stereotyping and the existence of
predominantly masculine structures within the system.
Many positive developments in addressing those issues
have been achieved.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/800)
demonstrates that, despite many efforts, a significant
amount of work remains to be done. We have to focus
on cultivating women's leadership and on working with
local actors, which is critical for ensuring a place for
women's voices at the peace table. That is also why
the shrinking space for women's non-governmental
organizations, grass root activists and human rights
defenders is such a worrisome trend.

Women remain the target of sexual and gender-
based violence. Throughout history, rape has become a
tool to punish, terrorize and destroy populations. Sexual
violence serves as a weapon in some cases, while in
others it is a form of reward. During periods of genocide
and ethnic cleansing, sexual violence has been used
to systematically attack the lineage of a group - for
example, by impregnating or sterilizing women. Major
General Patrick Cammaert, former Force Commander
of United Nations peacekeeping forces in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, once said that

"[i]t has probably become more dangerous to be a
woman than a soldier in armed conflict".

I would like to emphasize that the protection of women
from gender-based violence is inseparable from
women's meaningful participation, bodily autonomy
and rights. Accountability for violations of fundamental
human rights and violent crimes is also necessary to
end the reign of impunity, ensure the rule of law and
prevent relapse into conflict.

The preparations for the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) are timely, as an opportunity
for a national review of the efforts towards the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Let me briefly mention our own national
action plan, which is currently being prepared. The
process culminated after extensive collaboration with
and within the various ministries, in partnership
with the relevant stakeholders. The core aim is to
make the national action plan actionable and promote
accountability for its implementation through a rigorous
system of indicators.

Slovakia also supports gender parity and the
United Nations effort to increase the number of women
peacekeepers in missions. After conducting the thirty-
eighth rotation in the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus, Slovakia has exceeded the required
United Nations goal for 2019 of 5.25 per cent women
serving in military contingents; currently almost 11 per
cent of the personnel of the Slovak contingent are
women peacekeepers.

The increasingly complex and fractured contexts
reflecting the present security challenges require more
coherent action across the peace, humanitarian and
development nexus, including by providing support to
women acting as first responders. In our foreign policy
strategies, we aim to increasingly foster those links
and mainstream gender in a more systematic way. To
illustrate, we fund humanitarian projects with a focus on
women affected by conflict, including access to critical
health care, in Syria and neighbouring countries.

In conclusion, I would like to once again assure you,
Madam President, of Slovakia's strong commitment
to the full, effective and meaningful participation
of women in United Nations peace operations and
peace processes.

