Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the United States for organizing today's open
debate and giving us the opportunity to speak on this
very important issue.

Sexual violence in armed conflict shows a very
serious gap in the protection of civilians that was
rightly recognized and addressed in resolution 1325
(2000). We look forward to the adoption today of the
draft resolution, of which we are co-authors, affirming
that the prevention of acts of sexual violence can
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

We are deeply troubled that sexual violence
against women and girls is still prevalent in situations
of armed conflict. Such conduct is unacceptable, and
even more so when committed by peacekeeping
personnel.

Switzerland has adopted an action plan for
national implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and
it attaches the highest priority to combating gender-
based and sexual violence in the context of armed
conflict.

08-3908]
Practical measures are urgently needed in order to
strengthen prevention of and protection against sexual
Violence. To this end, the following four priority lines
of action should be considered.

First, Switzerland stresses the importance of
fighting against impunity. Acts of sexual violence must
not go unpunished. The prosecution of persons
suspected of having committed such acts is, first and
foremost, the task of States. However, when States are
unwilling or unable to prosecute acts of sexual
violence amounting to war crimes, crimes against
humanity or genocide, such cases must be referred to
the International Criminal Court. The Court clearly has
a crucial role to play in fighting impunity.

It is therefore essential to build up national law
enforcement capacities to ensure that States are able to
prosecute the perpetrators of sexual violence. Without
improved understanding of the root causes, the
mechanisms and the consequences of acts of sexual
violence, the perpetrators of gender-based and sexual
violence will continue to enjoy impunity.

Furthermore, disciplinary measures at the unit
commander level cannot be a substitute for military
criminal prosecution.

Secondly, systematic gender training should be
given to personnel working in the security sector,
including those in the armed forces, police and justice
systems, as well as United Nations personnel. Security
personnel must be able to respond in an appropriate
and timely manner to the different security needs of
women and men. It is therefore crucially important that
senior management personnel be included in gender
training programmes to ensure that dealing with sexual
violence against women forms an integral part of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We welcome
the specific references to the matter in the draft
resolution.

Thirdly, the Security Council should consider
establishing a monitoring mechanism to increase
accountability and ensure the integration of resolution
1325 (2000) into country-specific and related thematic
work. To this end, the Council should also set up a
structure for obtaining timely, accurate and reliable
information on sexual violence committed in situations
of armed conflict. United Nations field missions could
be entrusted with this task and thus serve as an early
warning system.
In addition, the Security Council could ask the
Secretary-General to submit reports on best practices,
based on the expertise of specialized agencies or
programmes, such as the United Nations Development
Fund for Women and UNICEF, and take into account
the security assessments of local and international
women's organizations.

Fourthly, the Security Council may wish to
consider the problem of sexual Violence against women
and girls, as referred to in resolution 1325 (2000), in
conjunction with resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1674
(2006), on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and resolution 1612 (2005), on children and armed
conflict.

Finally, Switzerland supports implementation of
the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy on this
issue and the establishment of conduct and disciplinary
units in all peacekeeping missions. Furthermore,
cooperation with the Office of Internal Oversight
Services should be strengthened. The goal is clear: all
United Nations personnel - military or civilian -
must be trained in the highest standards of conduct and
be held responsible for maintaining them.

