The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me join the
Secretary-General in commending the United States for
its initiative to convene this very important meeting. I
want to pay special tribute to you, Madam President,
for your leadership and commitment in this regard.
Under the guidance of the Secretary-General, the
United Nations has been vigorously working to prevent
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. Just last
month, the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), on behalf of the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, to which
the Secretary-General has referred, hosted a high-level
conference on the role of military peacekeepers and
others in responding to this scourge. A number of
former Force Commanders participating in that
conference conceded that more needs to be done to
protect women and children from widespread and
systematic sexual violence in conflict situations. We
are taking measures, conscious of the challenge we are
facing in addressing the problem. The conference
agreed that the credibility of peacekeeping operations
ought to be measured by how successful they are in
this respect, and it reached broad agreement on the fact
that the profound insecurity perpetuated by sexual
violence must be addressed at the political and tactical
levels.

The adoption in 2000 of resolution 1325 (2000)
demonstrated that sexual violence in conflict is not just
a gender issue; it is a fundamental security concern.
And the fact that the Security Council is holding this
meeting today sends another clear signal that sexual
and gender-based violence in conflict is within the
remit of the Council.

That fact is critical to improving our operational
approach. When the Council renewed the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo last December, it
adopted strong language, setting a precedent for
requiring specific responses to and reporting on sexual
violence.

Gender units in most peacekeeping operations are
working with key stakeholders, including uniformed
peacekeeping personnel, national authorities, women's
organizations and other sectors of civil society in
efforts to combat sexual and gender-based violence. All
missions have underlined training as an important
strategy to mobilize priority attention to this problem
among peacekeeping personnel and national partners.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights is undertaking
numerous measures as well, including monitoring,
investigating and documenting sexual and gender-
based violence as a human rights issue.

These critical activities are part of our broader
efforts to change attitudes to sexual and gender-based
violence. This will require re-evaluating cultural
practices and judicial systems to ensure that they are
fully inclusive and that they guarantee the protection of
women against all forms of abuse.

Sexual violence has not only grave physical,
psychological and health consequences for its victims
but also direct social consequences for communities
and entire societies. Impunity for sexual violence
committed during conflict perpetuates a tolerance of
abuse against women and girls and leaves a damaging
legacy by hindering national reconciliation.

Tackling this complex problem on all fronts will
require the combined effort of all, including
Governments, the United Nations System, civil society
organizations and non-governmental organizations. In
this regard, one of our greatest assets are women
themselves. If we promote the full and equal
participation of women in the security sector, we can
ensure that security services effectively identify and
respond to their needs.

The road ahead is long, but today's Council
meeting is a crucial step forward. Let us maintain this
forward momentum not only to protect women in
conflict situations, but to secure lasting peace for all.

