Mr. Romero Martinez (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. Minister, your presence here adds great
value to the Council's consideration of this topic, and it
also underscores the importance that your country
attaches to the subject. We wish to commend you on
the important initiative of convening this meeting on
women and peace and security.

My country, Honduras, believes as the Security
Council affirmed on 7 March 2007, that women play an
important role in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding (see S/PRST/2007/5).
We therefore condemn the harassment, attacks on
security, abuse, rape and any other manifestation of
violence or oppression to which women may be
subject, anywhere in the world.

For this reason, we fully associate ourselves with
resolution 1325 (2000). Not only do we associate
ourselves with it; we also consider that its
implementation should be an ongoing international
obligation of States.

We support the increased representation of
women at all levels, especially at decision-making
levels, in conflict resolution and peace processes. We
are certain, as has been indicated here in earlier
speeches, that the time has come for action. We
continue to hear of and to witness devastating events
that once again demonstrate a lack of human sensitivity
and the absence of adequate responsibility in terms of
compliance with our obligations.

Our country, which is small geographically, not
only values respect for the dignity of women; it is also,
in keeping with its domestic legislation, trying to
mainstream women in all spheres of daily activities. It
wishes to see their equitable participation in the
decision-making organs and is incorporating them in
conjunction with all sectors, in particular civil society,
in the struggle to promote the observance of human
rights and respect for the rule of law and to combat
marginalization and any kind of oppression or
discrimination.

The humanitarian responses of the United
Nations in any part of the world, as indicated by the
report of the Secretary-General, must have inherent in
them a common policy of incorporating gender
equality programmes. In post-conflict reconstruction
and rehabilitation, mechanisms and strategies designed
for and specifically aimed at women and girls should
be established. For this reason, we appreciate very
much the activities that various organizations of the
United Nations system are carrying out, incorporating
women in their projects. Among these, we would
highlight the United Nations Development Fund for
Women and the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women, which has
organized virtual debates on the incorporation of
gender issues into the reform of the security sector.

We also welcome the updating of the Action Plan
for 2008-2009, and we hope that it will be
implemented successfully.

Prevention of violence motivated by gender in
armed conflicts and response to this violence must be
tackled immediately. We all hope that acts of sexual
exploitation and abuse will end once and for all and
that everywhere in the world the values of women and
of girls will be regarded as sacred, as their integrity
and dignity should also be.

Consequently, the delegation of Honduras
associates itself with the endeavours to achieve
consistent and effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The value of a human being, the value of
a woman, the value of a girl, must be upheld by a
collective consciousness of respect worldwide.

