Mrs. Pejanovic' Durisie (Montenegro): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this meeting and to commend your strong commitment
to this important issue on the United Nations agenda. I
also thank today's briefers for their valuable inputs to
this debate.

As a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, Montenegro aligns itself with the
statement made by Canada on behalf of the Group.
Montenegro also aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I will,
however, add a few remarks in my national capacity.

In many countries of the world, including
Montenegro, women are not adequately involved in
the armed forces, in particular at the command and
decision-making levels. Therefore, in the process of
reforming our defence system, gender equality has
been largely considered as a matter of building up
human resources. As a result of our continuous efforts,
the number ofwomen in the armed forces has increased
from 8.7 per cent in 2011 to 10.6 per cent in 2019, as
has the number of women applying for admission to
foreign military academies and for employment in
the armed forces, as contractual soldiers, officers and
civilian personnel. Seven women have participated in
the peacekeeping mission of the International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan. The number of
women employed at the Ministry of Defence accounts
for 42.9 per cent of its personnel, with that rate being
14.7 per cent if the army of Montenegro is also taken
into account. By actively promoting possibilities for
women's education in foreign military academies, the
number of women in positions that were once typically
filled by men has increased. We now have a woman pilot,
a woman commander of a navigational ship squad and
women as leaders of chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear platoons, departments for mobile liaison
systems, engineer platoons and intelligence and
reconnaissance platoons, as well as a female Deputy
Commander of the Air Force Operational Centre. Next
year, a Montenegrin female cadet will graduate from
the prestigious United States Military Academy at
West Point.

Those statistics still indicate an insufficient number
of women, but reflect our clear commitment to reaching
both the national goals and our common aspirations
under the United Nations peacekeeping agenda,
including the United Nations uniformed gender parity
strategy for the period 2018-2028 and related initiatives.
Therefore, in 2016, the Ministry of Defence adopted a
strategy for human resources management, followed
by several human-resources-management plans and
policies, aimed at creating equal opportunities for
women and men to join the armed forces. Furthermore,
in June 2018, the Ministry ofDefence adopted guidelines
for increasing women's participation in the army of
Montenegro, defining very specific goals - to ensure
that more qualified and motivated female candidates
apply for admission to the armed forces and military
education programmes and that the selection process
for admission to the service and education programmes
takes into consideration gender equality to strengthen
the professional development of women in the army;
ensure that career advancement for women is not
hindered owing to formal and/or informal obstacles;
ensure the implementation of prevention and protection
mechanisms for sexual harassment; encourage and train
women to participate in international missions and
operations; and provide gender-responsive budgeting.

At the regional level, Montenegro, together with
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of North
Macedonia, participates in the implementation of a
regional project on strengthening regional cooperation
in integrating the gender perspective into the security
sector in the Western Balkans, financed by the Kingdom
of Norway and the Slovak Republic. In the forthcoming
period, in accordance with our long-term defence
development plan for the period 2019-2029, Montenegro
will intensify its efforts to bring the army closer to young
women. The focus is on creating conditions for further
increasing the number of women at the command level
and in peacekeeping operations. Additionally, we are
currently in the final stage of adopting our second four-
year action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in Montenegro. That action plan is also
focused on increasing the participation of women in
decision-making and peacekeeping processes, as well
as on the protection of women and girls in conflict
zones and the integration of gender perspectives and
gender education in peacekeeping operations.

Montenegro firmly believes that women's
participation and their career advancement are important
for more efficient and responsible armed forces, while
their participation in peacekeeping missions and
operations contributes to ensuring that peace processes
worldwide are comprehensive, inclusive and more
effective. Our best long-term contribution to increasing
women's meaningful participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations is our continuous investment
in building capacities within our national armed forces
in accordance with the best international standards of
gender parity.

