Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French): We wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this public
debate and to thank Mr. Guehenno for his statement.

By adopting resolution 1325 (2000) five years
ago, the Security Council set for itself the objective of
providing the international community with a common
frame of reference for guiding the action of States,
international institutions and civil society in gender
mainstreaming. The Secretary-General's assessment of
the resolution's implementation clearly shows both
progress and shortcomings.

Since the adoption of the resolution, we are
beginning to see a change in attitudes about the
situation of women as well as concerted action at all
levels to give women their rightful place in our
societies. We welcome the joint efforts of Member
States, the United Nations system and civil society
organizations - particularly women's groups - which
have succeeded in bringing about a reversal of the
negative tendencies that the resolution seeks to correct.
The heart-rending accounts that the Council heard
during the Arria formula meeting held on 25 October
enabled its members to be convinced of the crucial role
that women can and must play in conflict prevention
and settlement, particularly in post-conflict
reconstruction and recovery.

Since 2000, there has been a better understanding
of the role that women should play in decision-making
with regard to conflict prevention and of the need to
recognize and promote their contribution to the
establishment of lasting peace. Here, we commend the
initiative of the Global Partnership for the Prevention
of Armed Conflict, the Peace Mission of African First
Ladies and the approaches taken by various interested
partners aimed at defining a set of indicators that take
into account the special situation of women when
elaborating and implementing conflict-prevention and
early-warning mechanisms.

We particularly welcome the Secretary-General's
proposal of a global strategy to be implemented in the
United Nations system, including an action plan
defining priority areas of action to be carried out in the
process of its implementation. That global strategy will
enable the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and other interested partners to act
together in a coordinated manner to promote women's
full participation in conflict prevention activities and to
integrate their needs and priorities into data collection

and analysis for conflict prevention and early-warning
strategies.

We note with satisfaction that considerable
progress has been achieved with respect to
peacekeeping operations in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Republic of Benin
welcomes the drafting of a comprehensive strategy and
action plan to integrate gender issues into
peacekeeping activities here at Headquarters and in the
field, in particular in the planning for new operations,
which will now have targeted monitoring and follow-
up mechanisms. That represents a major step towards
the measurable enhancement of the United Nations
system's contribution to empowering women in
conflict areas.

Despite such considerable progress, we are
disturbed by the emergence in some peacekeeping
deployment zones of the phenomena of human
trafficking and persistent sexual and physical violence
against women and children. We pay tribute to the
Secretary-General for his bold initiatives to combat
those phenomena. Efforts in that field must be pursued
and complemented by the international community's
adoption of new measures to ensure greater protection
for women and children in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

In our view, the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) must be fully integrated into the mandate
of the peacebuilding commission envisioned by heads
of State and Government at the High-level Plenary
Meeting of the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session. The commission would do well to mainstream
gender issues through broader consultation with civil
society, and women's organizations in particular. In
that respect, we express our full support for the
Secretary-General's recommendations on specific
measures to be taken at the intergovernmental level,
systemwide at the United Nations, within its agencies,
and at the national level to improve implementation of
the resolution. They will help to institutionalize the
role of women in preventing and settling conflicts and
in peacebuilding.

Finally, we believe that the Council should
consider practical provisions to ensure more effective
follow-up to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in order to promote gender equality proactively
as a means of promoting international peace and
security. A periodic report on the implementation of the
Secretary-General's action plan would serve that
purpose well. Similarly, the appeal launched by non-
governmental organizations for the establishment of a
Security Council working group on that issue deserves
consideration. Such a working group could provide real
added value as a framework for cooperation among the
partners in a regular assessment of progress. The
international community could, in the near future,
thereby do justice by the other half of the world's
population by recognizing and valuing the role it plays
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

