Ms. Agladze (Georgia): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's meeting.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

As we prepare to mark the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, next year, and in view
of the slow progress in its implementation, accelerating
our efforts to ensure women's increased participation in
peace negotiations and in the decision-making process
is urgent. Georgia continues to attach significant
importance to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. Our third national action
plan for this agenda, covering the period 2018 to
2020, is harmonized with our national action plan on
the protection of human rights, based on a whole-of-
Government approach to integrating gender perspectives
in the security sector, while using a gender lens in
peace negotiations, protecting the rights of women and
girls and promoting their meaningful participation in
conflict prevention and conflict resolution.

The Inter-Agency Commission on Gender Equality,
Violence against Women and Domestic Violence
coordinates discussions among Government agencies,
as well as civil society organizations, to ensure the
effective implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda at the national and subnational
levels. For the first time, the notion of sexual
harassment, as well as sanctions for the perpetrators,
has been introduced by the Ministry of Defence in the
disciplinary code of the defence system. Moreover, the
Ministry adopted a set of detailed procedures regarding
complaints on bullying, sexual discrimination, sexual
harassment and abuse.

Georgia attaches particular importance to the role of
women, the use oftheir potential in peace processes and
the continuous facilitation of their increased involvement
in the confidence-building and reconciliation process.
We support the engagement of conflict-affected
women's non-governmental organizations in the
public diplomacy and dialogue process. There are
State programmes and services for victims and regular
consultations are conducted with women living along
the occupation line and their families on human
security, domestic violence, Violence against women
and sexual violence. Moreover, with the support
of UN-Women in Georgia, the Government holds
regular meetings to share information on the Geneva
international discussions and incident prevention and
response mechanisms among civil society, including
women's rights activists, internally displaced persons
and conflict-affected women. I would also like to
recall that in April the Government submitted a list of
specific commitments on women, peace and security to
be implemented before October 2020.

Despite our efforts to empower conflict-affected
women, Russia's occupation ofthe two Georgian regions
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali prevents my Government
from sharing the human rights protection framework
with women remaining on the other side of the illegally
erected fences. Alarmingly, the most recent so-called
borderization process and closure of the occupation
line in the Tskhinvali region fully isolates the occupied
area and creates the risk of a humanitarian crisis,
particularly in Akhalgori district. Yesterday, there was
yet another fatal accident when 70-year-old Margo
Martiashvili, a resident of Akhalgori district requiring
urgent medical assistance, died as a result of the denial
by the occupying regime to temporarily open the so-
called crossing point in order to access the nearest
hospital. She passed away in Tskhinvali.

Meanwhile, women living in Georgia's occupied
regions, as well as in areas adjacent to the occupation
line, continue to suffer from systemic grave violations
of their fundamental rights and freedoms, including,
but not limited to, freedom of movement and
illegal detentions by officers of the Russian Federal
Security Service.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm Georgia's
commitment to advancing the implementation of the
women, peace and security agenda at the national level
and to contributing towards its implementation globally.

