Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening the present open
debate on women and peace and security. I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN-Women, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the President and Founder
of Femmes Afrique Solidarite for their statements and
presentations. We are also grateful to the Secretary-
General for his report on the topic (S/2012/732).

Azerbaijan reiterates its strong condemnation
of all acts of violence committed against women and
girls in situations of armed conflict and calls upon
all parties to such conflicts to strictly abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law. All the necessary measures must
be taken to bring perpetrators of such acts to justice
and to put an end to impunity. Azerbaijan welcomes
the increasing attention of the Security Council and the
wider international community to the topic. Indeed,
the adoption by the Security Council of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) was an important milestone that
took up the issue of women and peace and security as
a separate thematic issue and brought international
visibility to the plight of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict. The subsequent Council resolutions,
presidential statements and other relevant documents
have contributed to developing a solid framework and
raising awareness of the impact that sexual violence has
on victims, families and societies.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his
report, 37 States have adopted national action plans
to implement that resolution. Several countries have
also adopted temporary special measures to increase
the number of women in decision-making bodies.
The protection of civilians has been included in the
mandates of 8 of 16 peacekeeping missions.

The establishment of the post of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict has added a new dimension to the
global efforts to fight that scourge. I would like to take
the opportunity to wish Ms. Zainab Bangura, newly
appointed Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, every success in carrying out her important
mandate.

Despite some achievements since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), women's participation in
conflict prevention and resolution remains too low. We
support the appointment of more women as mediators,
special representatives, special envoys and heads
of missions. We take positive note of the issuance
of Guidance for Effective Mediation on addressing
conflict-related sexual violence in ceasefire and peace
agreements, which provides mediators with normative
standards and strategies. We look forward to the
practical implementation of the Guidance.

There is a clear need to increase the number of
female military and police personnel in United Nations
missions, and we appreciate the efforts taken by troop-

and police-contributing countries to that end. At the
same time, as the report of the Secretary-General
underlines, increased numbers alone are not enough,
and gender expertise is also needed. We stress the
importance of regular training for gender advisers and
of the promotion the role of women protection advisers
in peacekeeping missions.

It is obvious that States bear the primary
responsibility for enhancing women's participation in
conflict-prevention and resolution and in peacebuilding,
and all United Nations mechanisms should work
closely with respective Governments to support and
complement their efforts. We share the Secretary-
General's view that international assistance for relief
and recovery work in essential in supporting countries
in ending violence and building peace.

We believe that women's civil society organizations,
in close cooperation with the relevant Governments,
can advance the women and peace and security agenda
by bringing forward their concerns, priorities and
rights in conflict prevention and resolution, and in the
peacebuilding process. That will also allow women
not only to benefit from the gains achieved in such
processes, but also to be active contributors to peace,
security and development.

More resolute and targeted measures are required
to end impunity for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community, including those
committed against women in situations of armed
conflict. Among the pressing issues requiring urgent
action and attention is that of women taken hostage and
reported missing in connection with armed conflict.
We are continuing our efforts to address that disturbing
phenomenon, including through the relevant biannual
resolution ofthe General Assembly and the Commission
on the Status of Women, of which Azerbaijan is a main
sponsor.

The heightened vulnerability of civilians in
wartime, in particular forcibly displaced persons,
refugees, women and children requires urgency,
dedication and strong commitment in all protection
efforts at the regional and global levels that must be
free of selectivity and politically motivated approaches
and purposes.

Azerbaijan notes the role that the relevant
humanitarian mandates must play in that regard
and thus ensure that all situations of armed conflict,
including of a protracted nature, receive due attention
by the international community.

