Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany welcomes this
open thematic debate on women and peace and
security. I would like to express Germany's
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for this important
initiative.

Germany aligns itself with the declaration made
by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union, and would like to add the following
remarks.

We congratulate the Secretary-General on his
report (S/2009/362) pursuant to resolution 1820
(2008), which we are discussing today and which
Germany is pleased to have supported. The report
contains compelling evidence that sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict is indeed not only a serious
human rights and humanitarian concern, but also a
security problem requiring a systematic security
response, including through attention by the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court. As the
report rightly states, in bringing together available
data, no matter how incomplete, the report shows a
disturbing picture of the use of sexual violence against
civilians in armed conflicts and their aftermath.

Much still needs to be done by Member States in
order to ensure a more timely and efficient response to
these challenges. In this regard, Germany supports the
proposal for the establishment of a commission of
inquiry. We also reiterate our support for an
appropriate follow-up mechanism of the Security
Council. Both proposals would allow the Council to
better fulfil its mandate. We welcome the efforts made
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
United Nations membership to integrate the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) into the
ongoing New Horizon debate on the reform of
peacekeeping missions.

The report also contains a wealth of information
on what the United Nations is already doing in order to
combat sexual violence. We commend all United
Nations entities on their extremely important work and
encourage them to further intensify their efforts. Given
the fact that the issue of conflict-related sexual

violence is already being addressed by so many actors
in the United Nations system, it could provide an
excellent test case for a more structured and integrated
approach by the United Nations to a specific problem.
However, as in other areas relating to the field of
gender equality and the empowerment of women, a
strong driver is currently missing.

Germany hopes that the negotiations on the
establishment of a new United Nations gender entity
will soon create those necessary structures. In this
context, we would like to point out that any new
gender architecture must also be responsive to the
special mandates under resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008).

