Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Mariano Rajoy Brey,
President of the Government of Spain, and we thank the
Spanish delegation for its initiative in convening this
important debate. We would also like to commend the
briefings by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and by
Under-Secretary-General Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
whom we congratulate for her tireless and successful
work as the Executive Director of UN-Women. We
would also like to thank Ms. Julienne Lusenge,
Ms. Yanar Mohammed and Ms. Alaa Murabit for their
important briefings.

Gender inequality and diverse forms of violence
against women and girls result from various phenomena
supported by deep religious, political and sociocultural
roots that have prevailed throughout history in many
countries, creating massive and ongoing violations
of the human rights of women and girls. That is an
unacceptable situation.

Exclusion, inequality and the different forms of
sexual violence against women and girls in times
of armed conflict only reflect and exacerbate the
imbalances and inequalities that women suffer in
non-conflict periods. Those inequalities generate the
conditions of specific vulnerability that require urgent
attention and the highest political commitment. If we
do not address that injustice in peacetime, we will be
even less able to do so in times of armed conflict.

We are celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption ofresolution 1325 (2000), which recognized the
disproportionate and unique impact of armed conflict
on women and girls, and the key role that women play
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts as well as
in peacebuilding and the consolidation of peace. We
welcome that.

There have been significant advances in the
normative sphere in the past 15 years. Nevertheless,
great challenges and a sense of frustration remain,
since women in situations of armed conflict continue to
suffer disproportionately from the brutal consequences
of those conflicts. They remain the objects of recurrent
and systematic violence and sexual abuse. That situation
is, unfortunately, linked to the strategic, ideological and
financial objectives of extremist and terrorist groups,
such as the self-proclaimed Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front, the Army of
Conquerors and Boko Haram, among others.

In addition, women are underrepresented in
forums devoted to peacebuilding and the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. The situation provides
clear evidence that, throughout recent years, genuine
political commitment to the issue has been lacking. We
are convinced that the participation and contributions
of women at all levels, stages and areas related to
conflict management are essential in order to prevent
conflicts and achieve lasting peace. There can be no
international peace and security if we do not include or
have due consideration for and incorporate half of the
world's population, namely, women and girls.

Venezuela is a land of peace. We have no areas of
armed conflict in our territory, and we do not participate
in any. That is why our Bolivarian revolution is at the
forefront of ensuring gender equality and empowering
women so that they have the possibility of serving
as leaders in our society. Our major battle is against
poverty and exclusion. We understand clearly that
women have a leading role to play in that fundamental
development effort, because women embody and
represent the spiritual foundation of our society and the
umbilical cord to our culture and our future.

Under the inspiration of the late President Hugo
Chavez Frias and as part of our 1999 constitutional
process, the Bolivarian Constitution guarantees the
broadest human rights for our people and establishes
gender equality, while also banning any kind of
discrimination against women, whether on religious,
racial or ethnic grounds. We do not tolerate any kind of
exclusion or violence against women.
Over the past 16 years, women have served, in
accordance with our Constitution, as Speakers of our
National Assembly and as leaders in our judiciary and
electoral bodies; they have also served as moral leaders.
We have reformed our penal code to specifically
criminalize violence against women. In the ministerial
composition of our Government, women are in the
majority. In our legislative elections, 50 per cent of the
candidates must be women in accordance with the new
electoral law.

We have created the Ministry for the Popular Power
for Women, and community councils are, in the vast
majority, headed by women, through which they manage
resources and direct projects aimed at benefiting their
communities. Today, women in our country direct
fundamental aspects of our society on an equal basis
with men. We therefore have full moral authority to
demand an end to discrimination and violence against
women and girls, and to repudiate the notion of women
as sex objects in consumer society or as the spoils of
war at the hands of extremists. This world, wracked by
violence and extremism, must act more decisively, and
its leaders must act with greater political determination
to address this injustice.

We welcome the reference in resolution 2242 (2015),
adopted today, to the importance of men and boys
working together to promote the participation of women
in the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts
and in peacebuilding and post-conflict situations. The
"HeforShe" campaign promoted by UN-Women - of
whose Executive Board we are a member and which we
commend - should serve as a commitment and guide
for the actions of everyone, not just women, in times of
armed conflict as well as in peacetime.

The prevention and peaceful settlement of
disputes is always the best and most appropriate tool
for preventing the harmful and devastating effects of
armed conflicts on the civilian population, particularly
on women and children. It is therefore essential to halt
the training, equipping and supporting of non-State
actors and extremists, who are used as instruments of
political destabilization to overthrow Governments,
acting in service to the geopolitical ambitions offoreign
actors, and in most cases, they serve only to incite the
commission of atrocities, acting with impunity against
women and children. Such groups today have covered
Africa and the Middle East in blood. They are motivated
by extremist ideologies that target women and girls in
the most abhorrent and unacceptable way.

If, in line with international law, we fully respected
and honoured the ban on the provision of weapons and
financial support to extremist groups, there would
be a decrease in the operational capabilities of those
actors, thus reducing the harmful and irreparable
consequences of armed conflicts on the civilian
population, particularly on women and children.

We welcome the call made today in the resolution
just adopted to continue working to improve the
training of all personnel deployed in the field so as to
strengthen the presence of gender experts and advisers
on the protection of women in the staff of the various
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its support for the zero-tolerance policy with regard
to the incidents of violence and sexual abuse that have
had taken place or will take place in operations carried
out by the United Nations. The Organization should
show resolve and coherence regarding the importance
of accountability for any personnel who commit
such crimes. It is also crucial for the international
community to be firm in condemning countries whose
personnel commit these types of crimes and encourage
them to adopt the measures necessary to punish those
responsible for acts of abuse and sexual exploitation
committed by foreign forces not associated with the
United Nations, so that such reprehensible actions do
not go unpunished.

In conclusion, we hope that this wide-ranging and
fruitful debate will enable us to act and move forward
concretely in resolving this issue. As we have stated,
women, girls and boys can no longer be considered the
spoils of war or objects of violence and oppression in
any society or under any circumstance. That would be
an outrage to us as human beings.

