Mr. Ozawa (Japan): At the outset, I should like
to pay tribute to you, Sir, Ambassador John D.
Negroponte, for convening this meeting on the third
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. I should also like to extend my appreciation to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Amy Smythe for
sharing with the Council their insightful observations
regarding the implementation of the resolution.

The ultimate goal of the international community,
and therefore of the United Nations, is to build a world
free of conflict. By adopting that resolution three years
ago, the Security Council showed its wisdom by fully
recognizing the important role played by women and
girls in the process of building and maintaining peace
and security. As a country striving to do its utmost in
the areas of conflict prevention and post-conflict
peace-building, Japan fully supports this resolution and
will intensify its efforts to implement it. Empowering
women is one of the key elements of enhancing peace
and security.

Allow me to share with the Council some modest
but practical steps that Japan has taken in this regard.
In Afghanistan, we remember that under the Taliban
regime, women were denied access to education and
work outside their homes. For a country in a
reconstruction process, such as Afghanistan, Japan is
convinced that the participation of women is absolutely
essential, and thus a gender perspective is taken into
account in all aspects of Japan's reconstruction and
humanitarian assistance programmes for Afghanistan.
For example, the Japan International Cooperation
Agency sent experts on gender issues to the Ministry of
Women's Affairs, to the sector responsible for the
rehabilitation of women's schools and colleges and to
the mother and child healthcare hospital. Japan
provides the United Nations Development Fund for
Women with assistance through the Trust Fund for
Human Security. That assistance finances vocational
training, seminars, and income-generating programmes
for female Afghan refugees and displaced persons. We
believe that such programmes help to empower women
and girls and encourage them to assume more active
roles in Afghanistan.

Allow me to share with the Council another
example of the efforts Japan is making. In February
last year, the Government of Japan dispatched a
Ground Self-Defence Forces engineer group of 680
members, together with 10 headquarters personnel, to
the United Nations peacekeeping operation in Timor-
Leste. For the first time in our history, Japan included
female personnel in that large peacekeeping unit. Seven
women were members of the group, a relatively small
number but significant nonetheless, we believe. Japan
recognizes the need for expanding the roles and
contributions of women in United Nations field-based
operations and indeed for increasing the participation
of women at all levels. We are starting by doing what
we can but have every intention of broadening and
increasing our efforts.

On this third anniversary, I reaffirm the
commitment of my delegation to the implementation of
the provisions of the Council's resolution on women
and peace and security; my delegation condemns the
violations of the human rights of women and girls in
conflict situations, wherever they occur.

We are all aware that women experience conflict
in different ways than men. In a conflict situation,
women are often widows grieving the loss of their
husbands, mothers who mourn their lost children and
victims of violence that targets their gender. Today,
however, women's roles are changing in every aspect,
and more women have a say in how they will
participate in conflict resolution. More women can
participate not only by providing non-military support
but also by assuming important roles in peace-building
if they so wish.

In order to provide an effective response to the
challenging needs and priorities of women and girls
who take on this range of tasks, gender perspectives
have to be more systematically integrated into all
activities related to peace and security. There is still
much to be done in this regard. Japan hopes that the
Security Council, Member States, the United Nations
system - including the offices within the Secretariat
responsible for these issues - non-governmental
organizations and civil society as a whole will all do
everything in their power to fully and systematically
implement the recommendations of this resolution.

To conclude, may this discussion be a
demonstration of the firm commitment of the entire
international community to achieving the goal of
creating a world of peace and security.

