Ms. Hasan (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would
like to extend my most heartfelt thanks to the Spanish
delegation for having invited me today to talk about
an important subject that is ravaging the members of
my community.

I will open with a phrase that I heard on several
occasions after the black day of the attack on the Yazidi
region of Sinjar on 3 August 2014. It is a phrase told to
me over the phone by a Yazidi in the hands of Da'esh: "I
beg you to tell the authorities that if they cannot liberate
us, they should bomb us." That phrase still reverberates
in my ears, as that sad and terrified girl told it to me.
That phrase, which I heard on subsequent occasions as
well, from other Yazidis, was uttered in vain. Indeed,
the terrorist organization Da'esh abducted over 6,500
Yazidi women and children. For two years, four months
and eighteen days, our women and girls have been sold
in slave markets and have been subjected to sexual
slavery and the slave trade in the worst phenomenon of
modern history, because Da'esh has taken us back to the
age of slavery and the slave trade, where a twelve-year-
old girl is sold for a pack of cigarettes. Those crimes
are an embarrassment to humankind. The international
community remained silent in the face of all that has
happened and is happening still.

Since 3 August 2014, the suffering of Yazidi has
continued. Women, in particular, and indeed, Yazidi
mothers have to choose between being raped themselves
or having their own children raped before their very
eyes. That is how we are treated by Da'esh. The
virginity of our girls has become the portal to paradise,
according to the laws and ideals of Da'esh. The majority
were presented as presents during Da'esh festivities or
religious competitions. What Da'esh is doing is based
on extremist precepts based on fatwahs and religious
texts within Islamic jurisprudence. We know that Islam
also contains moderate ideas and principles, but the
worst part is that Muslim political and religious leaders
have remained silent in the face ofwhat Da'esh is doing.
That has led to our sadness and fear.

There is no clear fatwah stating that the murder of
the Yazidis or non-Muslims is a sin. There is no fatwah
that clearly states those who commit such crimes
are infidels. There is no such fatwa. We have heard no
clear expressions of sympathy from leaders. We are
facing a perniciousphenomenon that affects all States,
including those that are stable and democratic. We need
only consider the terrible attack yesterday in Germany
and the murder of the Russian Ambassador in Turkey,
committed in cold blood while the terrorists shouted
religious slogans.

The international community must eradicate
terrorism and eliminate its sources of financing. Da'esh
could not commit all those massacres without support.
The Yazidis are victims who have paid a very heavy
price and been forced to leave the countries where
they have lived for thousands of years. Some have
been freed, but genocide has been committed and the
Council has been unable to stop it. When selected areas
have been reopened, we find the mass graves of Yazidi
men, women and even disabled people. Yazidis have
often been the victims of murder. If the international
community does not provide us with protection, other
groups will commit similar crimes and once again
thousands of women and girls will become sexual slaves.

We cannot compromise with the honour and
dignity of our women and girls. I would ask members
to imagine for a few seconds that their son or daughter
became the object of a lucrative trade by terrorists or
was brainwashed and became a terrorist. Those are
very sad images, but unfortunately we them experience
every day. That is the reality we witness daily; it is
a twenty-first century reality. Our women and our
children are brought to slave markets, much like in
medieval times. How can the human conscience stand
for that? More than 6,500 Yazidi women were abducted
but no military operation was carried out to free them.
Where is justice? More than 3,000 women and children
were freed by various means through the help of an
office of the Government of Kurdistan entrusted with
the affairs of kidnapped individuals and others.

The Yazidi religious leaders adopted a declaration
facilitating the reintegration victims and their provision
of special assistance. We are very grateful, but there are
more than 3,000 abducted women who are not treated
as prisoners of war. but used as sexual slaves, shared
and exchanged among fighters. We understand that the
international community has expressed sympathy for
our plight, but it must act to stop the genocide and to
protect our women so that they do not become objects
of such slavery.

To ensure the freedom of more than 3,000 Yazidi
women who remain in the hands of Da'esh, I request
that Yazidi areas be protected. I also ask for the
protection of other minorities to prevent the recurrence
of genocide and the enslavement of women. There is
a need to evacuate more than 4,000 immigrants from
Turkey and other countries, who currently live in very
difficult conditions, and to give the Yazidis, particularly
those who have been victims of slavery, opportunities
to immigrate, as Germany has done.

There are 100,000 displaced persons and refugees
in camps in Kurdistan. Despite the liberation of Yazidi
areas, they have been unable to return and need the
Council's support given their humanitarian and health
problems. They need to be provided with consistent
support to face the problems of genocide and sexual
enslavement. We encourage the International Criminal
Court to investigate those crimes. I hope that our
requests will be considered so that we are able to
survive in dignity.

