Ms. Bailey: On behalf of the African Union, I wish
to congratulate and commend the French presidency of
the Security Council for convening this open debate.
We also wish to thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti,
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for her
contribution to this debate. We commend all the briefers
for their insightful statements, which highlighted their
robust commitment to the global agenda on women and
peace and security.

Today's debate is taking place at a pivotal moment,
when both the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations have embarked on a path of institutional
reform to better serve and support Member States in
their quest for peace and sustainable development for
all. Over the years, Member States have reaffirmed
their commitment to advancing the agenda of women
and peace and security, yet we continue to see a very
limited and disproportionate presence of women in
peace processes around the world.

The slow progress witnessed in the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda is
fully recognized by His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, who at the very outset of his accession to
the helm of the African Union Commission pronounced
very clearly his commitment and determination to
advance the gender agenda on the continent, with a
primary objective to have concrete actions and results
on the ground that impact the lives of women and girls
who, for far too long, have and continued to suffer the
brunt of violence and conflict.

Building on the 2014 decision of AU Ministers of
Gender that, among other things, called for the creation
of an association of women in mediation, at its meeting
on 13 March, the African Union Peace and Security
Council endorsed modalities for the creation of a
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, known as FemWise-Africa, which aims to
strengthen the role of women in conflict prevention and
mediation efforts in the context of the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture.

Subsequently, in the spirit of enhancing working
relations between the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council, this
Council received a briefing and endorsed the African
Union initiative FemWise-Africa in the context of an
Arria Formula meeting on 27 March. FemWise-Africa
was officially endorsed by the AU Assembly of Heads
of State on 4 July.

We strongly believe that FemWise-Africa will
be a potent tool to strengthen the role of women in
conflict prevention and mediation efforts and will
provide a platform for strategic advocacy, capacity-
building and networking in order to further enhance
the implementation of commitments for women's
inclusion in peacemaking in Africa. Key priorities
of FemWise-Africa include, among others, ensuring
a channel for women's meaningful and effective
participation in peace processes, including as heads of
official high-level mediation missions, and initiating
women's action that will catalyse and mainstream
the engagement of women in mediation in line with
the African Union's Agenda 2063 and the global
Sustainable Development Goals.

As part of the African Union's effort to build
partnerships in enhancing the leadership of women
while promoting and supporting Africa's transformation
agenda with a focus on governance, peace and stability
in order to accelerate the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), the African Union Commission and UN-
Women, with the support of the Federal Republic of
Germany, launched an initiative called the African
Women Leaders Network during a high-level women
leaders forum for Africa's transformation held at the
United Nations from 31 May to 2 June.

At this juncture, Madam President, I wish to thank
your delegation for announcing here your Government's
support to the African Women Leaders Network. One
of the hallmarks of this partnership was the visit
undertaken to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the first solidarity mission under the aegis
of the African Women Leaders Network. A group of
friends of the African Women Leaders Network will
be established in New York and will be headed by
Her Excellency Mrs. Martha Pobee, the Permanent
Representative of Ghana. The African Women Leaders
Network will also be officially launched in Africa in
February 2018.

It is often said that there is strength in numbers. The
recently signed Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security provides yet another window of opportunity
for an enhanced partnership between our institutions to
strengthen efforts in advancing the women and peace
and security agenda. From that perspective, the African
Union commends the Secretary-General and welcomes
the establishment of his High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation and for appointing three prominent African
women leaders, namely Ms, Gbowee, Ms. Machel and
Ms. Migiro.

In line with United Nations-AU enhanced
partnership, the African Union collaborates with several
United Nations offices, particularly UN-Women and the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. That robust
framework of cooperation reflects our mutual efforts to
fully empower women as peace agents and to prevent
sexual violence in conflict. In that context, our common
objective is to ensure joint advocacy and concrete
engagement on the ground. This emphasis on ensuring
the participation of women and accountability for
crimes of sexual violence is a key aspect of prevention,
notably through support to national authorities in
order to strengthen their rule-of-law response and
institutional configurations to implement the women
and peace and security agenda.

Before I conclude, allow me to commend and salute
the tradition of holding an annual commemorative
meeting on the adoption of the landmark resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. The African
Union Peace and Security Council has adopted a similar
approach in its endeavour to resolutely advance the
women and peace and security agenda. Accordingly,
on 31 October, the African Union Peace and Security
Council will hold an open meeting on the theme "The
role of women in preventing and countering violent
extremism in Africa". The African Union Commission
remains a key partner and will continue to mobilize its
member States and partners to ensure that the women
and peace and security agenda remains central in the
implementation of the African Union's Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

