Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome
the initiative to hold an open debate on resolution 1820
(2008) and the role of women and peace and security. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his report (S/2009/362), and welcome the
statements made this morning.

As the Secretary-General points out, sexual
violence is deeply dehumanizing, inflicts serious
physical and psychological wounds, is accompanied by
fear, shame and stigmatization, and is often a method
of torture. Women and girls have been particularly
vulnerable to such violence in the armed conflicts that
have occurred throughout history, although they are not
the only victims. That is why resolution 1820 (2008)
represents an important step forward at the normative
and operational levels in firmly condemning all forms
of sexual violence against civilians in armed conflict
and in adopting measures aimed at its elimination.

Moreover, this debate is particularly relevant as it
is taking place a few days after the Security Council
took a step forward in protecting children in armed
conflict by adopting resolution 1882 (2009),
co-sponsored by my country, which extends the criteria
whereby parties to a conflict may be included in the
reports that the Secretary-General must periodically
submit to the Security Council on that matter.
Resolution 1882 (2009) includes sexual violence
among those criteria. My delegation therefore believes
that it is important that Security Council resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1882 (2009) be mutually reinforcing
in preventing and combating sexual violence against
women and children in conflict situations.

Due implementation of resolution 1820 (2008)
undoubtedly calls for prevention measures and resolute
actions to combat impunity, effective mechanisms of
assistance to victims and the greater empowerment of
women, making them part of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes. It also continues to be a
priority to include gender perspective in issues related
to peace and security. There we see the
complementarity of implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

Peru also believes that, as the Secretary-General
stresses in his report, it is fundamentally important that
resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, whether to establish or renew
mandates or to impose sanctions, contain provisions to
prevent and respond to acts of sexual Violence.
Furthermore, peacekeeping operations should have
clear mandates for attaining this objective.

I welcome the progress made by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in formulating
guidelines to facilitate implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). Also valuable are studies
of peacekeeping best practices to combat sexual
violence that the DPKO is carrying out together with
the United Nations Development Fund for Women and
the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict. It is important that during the early recovery
and peacebuilding phases efforts continue in this area.
It is critical to continue support for the endeavours of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the work of the
United Nations Development Programme in the field.

Without socio-economic opportunity for victims
of sexual violence, we cannot hope for lasting peace.
Nor is lasting peace possible without the rule of law or
access to justice. For that reason, the fight against
impunity is fundamental to the eradication of sexual
violence.

One key element in addressing this question is
the availability of complete information on instances of
sexual violence in armed conflict. As indicated by the
Secretary-General, many cases are known through ad
hoc tribunals, transitional justice mechanisms and other
special mechanisms, although only scattered
information exists on this topic. Thus, it is necessary to
look into mechanisms to enable the United Nations
agencies, the various committees of the Security
Council and the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to exchange reliable information on
acts of sexual violence, with a view to taking measures
to reduce and combat this scourge. My delegation also
believes that it is important to consider the Secretary-
General's request to establish a Security Council
follow-up mechanism regarding measures taken by
parties involved in conflict so as to comply with their
international obligations to prevent and combat sexual
violence.

We note with satisfaction that the international
community is making efforts to move forward on the

protection of civilians, especially women and children
in armed conflict and in post-conflict situations.
Resolution 1820 (2008) and other resolutions reflect
shared values and the unanimous condemnation of
sexual violence against civilians in armed conflict. It is
only through concerted efforts and political will that it
will be possible to create a safe and sustainable
environment for peacebuilding processes.

