Mr. Khalek (Egypt): During the past 15 years,
the Security Council has laid the foundations for
a normative framework for the agenda on women
and peace and security, starting with the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000). Egypt noted with interest the
Secretary-General's most recent report on women and
peace and security (S/2014/693). Today's debate's focus
on the situation of refugees, internally displaced persons
and stateless women and girls is a good opportunity to
follow up on specific commitments made across various
normative frameworks relevant to this agenda. In that
context, I would like to make the following points.

First, Egypt recognizes that women's economic,
cultural, political and social empowerment is crucial to
a life free of violence and a key element in sustainable
development. Secondly, we are deeply concerned about
the increasing rates and patterns of violence against
women and girls, mass displacement flows and related
humanitarian challenges that have occurred in many
conflict and post-conflict settings in 2014, especially
in countries bordering on Syria and in some parts of
Iraq, Somalia and the Central African Republic. We
agree with the Secretary-General's description of such
violations as deliberate campaigns against women's
rights. ln that regard, we stress the indispensable role
ofjustice and the rule of the law in protecting women's
rights.

Thirdly, Egypt commends the serious investigations
the United Nations has conducted in order to address
violations and abuses of women's human rights
committed by some United Nations peacekeepers and
personnel. However, the investigations are still slow
and inconclusive, and in that regard we highlight the
significance of references to zero tolerance in the
mandates of new field missions.

Fourthly, we see a gap between policies and
standards and their implementation, with the biggest of
these evident in the working methods of the Security
Council. While we acknowledge that resolution 2122
(2013) on women and peace and security addressed
some of those gaps, we believe that more systematic
information-gathering, implementation and monitoring
of implementation are still needed.
Fifthly, Egypt believes that the agenda for
women and peace and security needs more financial
resources directed to projects related to sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict situations. We also
stress the importance of strengthening the ability of
the United Nations system to effectively prevent and
respond, through early warnings and early action, to
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

The latest practices of the Israeli army in Gaza are
clear violations of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of Arab women and girls under foreign
occupation. According to the Secretary-General's report
on Palestine contained in document S/2014/650, at least
2,104 Palestinians have reportedly been killed. That
number includes at least 1,462 civilians, 495 of whom
were children and 253 were women. In that context,
Egypt expresses its regret that the Secretary General's
report on women and peace and security (S/2014/693)
is without a single reference to the atrocities committed
against Palestinian women in the Palestinian occupied
territories.

In that regard, we request the Secretary General
and the field-based entities, particularly UN-Women
and the Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, to systematically include information on
the situation of women and girls in the Arab occupied
territories in their reports. We urge them to ensure that
forcibly displaced populations are protected against any
form of violence. Egypt reiterates its commitment to
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), in line with its international obligations, as well
as its conviction that women could play a critical and
indispensable role in resolving armed conflicts and
post-conflict situations.

With regard to the reference made by the United
States delegation to a rape incident in Cairo, although
it is totally irrelevant to the theme of today's debate,
I wish to state that all such incidents are being fully
investigated and that perpetrators are duly prosecuted
before the judiciary.

In conclusion, I also want to express my deep
appreciation to the Argentine presidency for submitting
an excellent concept paper (S/2014/731, annex) to the
Council. It has already enriched the debate.

