Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I am pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, an informal network of 51 interested Member
States chaired by Canada, representing all five regional
groups of the United Nations. One year after the high-
level review on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), the Group reaffirms its unwavering support for
the Council's work on this critical agenda.

The Group welcomes the establishment of the
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security as an outcome of resolution 2242 (2015) to
facilitate a more systematic approach to the agenda
in the Council and enable greater oversight and
coordination of implementation efforts. We strongly
encourage the Informal Expert Group to include in its
work the regular participation of civil society and to
share its conclusions with all Member States.

Recognizing that Member States and regional
organizations are influential actors in the
implementation of all women and peace and security
resolutions, the Group emphasizes the importance of
national action plans, with appropriate resourcing,
monitoring and civil-society consultation. The Group
welcomes the establishment, led by Spain, ofthe women
and peace and security national focal point network,
which will periodically share and exchange lessons
learned and best practices. The Group also welcomes
the establishment of the Global Acceleration Instrument
as one avenue to attract resources, coordinate responses
and accelerate implementation.

Noting the impact of inclusion, especially women's
participation, on the durability of peace agreements,
the Group stresses the importance of the meaningful
participation of women at all stages of the peace
processes and the elimination of barriers to their
participation, as well as the mainstreaming of gender-
specific language and the human rights of women in
peace agreements. The Group also encourages the
United Nations to include the women and peace and
security agenda more systematically in its work on
preventive diplomacy.

The Group emphasizes the indispensable role
played by women in United Nations peacekeeping
and underscores that their participation at all levels is
key to the operational effectiveness of missions. The
Group calls for the increased participation of women in
peacekeeping at all levels, the integration of the human
rights of women and a gender perspective into all
aspects ofpeacekeeping, and the timely and appropriate
resourcing and staffing of gender advisers at United
Nations Headquarters and missions. The Group also
calls for the full implementation of the commitments
made at the United Nations peacekeeping defence
ministerial held in London in September.

The Group expresses its profound concern
regarding the impact of the unprecedented wave of
forced displacement on women and girls. In this
regard, it calls for the more systematic engagement
of women and girls in the design and implementation
of humanitarian assistance and early recovery
programmes. In line with humanitarian principles,
the Group further calls for the promotion of access to
medical, legal, psychosocial and livelihood services to
displaced persons, including sexual and reproductive
health services, without discrimination.

The Group condemns in the strongest terms incidents
of sexual violence in all conflicts, including the ongoing
trafficking, rape and enslavement of Yazidi women
and girls by Da'esh; the abduction and sexual abuse of
women and schoolgirls by Boko Haram in Nigeria; and
the ongoing use of sexual violence as a weapon of war
in conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Sudan, among many others. Such gender-
based violence is a grave violation and abuse of human
rights and international humanitarian law, and remains
a barrier to the full achievement of gender equality,
peace and development. We call for accountability for
such crimes, including through the implementation of
the international protocol on the documentation and
investigation of sexual violence in conflict, as well as
greater support for survivors. Furthermore, the Group
deplores the fact that the stigmatization of survivors
exacerbates their marginalization and is a barrier to
their full recovery.

Lastly, the Group of Friends condemns in the
strongest terms cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
in peacekeeping operations, and it reaffirms its full
commitment to the zero-tolerance policy of the United
Nations with regard to all civilian, military and police
personnel. We call on the international community to
redouble its efforts to combat this scourge and welcome
the recent efforts undertaken by Member States and the
Secretary-General to prevent sexual exploitation and
abuse, to pursue accountability for perpetrators and to
provide support to victims. In this regard, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2272 (2016), the appointment
of the Special Coordinator on Improving the United
Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse,
and the establishment of the Trust Fund in Support of
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.

(spoke in French)

Allow me to make some additional points as
Canada's representative.

First, Canada supports the important work of UN-
Women and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Secondly, the advancement of gender equality and
the socioeconomic empowerment of women and girls
are critical to all peace and development goals.

Thirdly, the United Nations and its Member States
must do more to integrate women and peace and
security issues in peace operations by ending sexual
Violence and abuse by peacekeeping personnel and by
devoting more resources to gender adviser positions.

Fourthly, we must take a broad approach to ending
gender inequality by involving men and boys as well
as women and girls in the joint creation of a truly
inclusive space.

And finally, Canada is implementing this agenda
domestically by renewing our action plan on women
and peace and security; ensuring the meaningful
participation of women in our peace operations;
incorporating a gender-based approach into military
operations; and providing support to survivors of
sexual violence in conflict zones.
Canada remains ready to work together to further
advance the important resolution 1325 (2000) agenda.

