Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to congratulate the Nigerian
presidency on having convened this debate, and to
thank all those, particularly women, who work day in
and day out to promote peace and security. Our thanks
also go to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura,
for her contributions.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) , the
women and peace and security agenda has clearly
progressed both in reach and depth and now occupies
a recognized place among the panoply of legal and
political instruments and specific actions carried out
by the Organization to champion the importance of
adopting a gender perspective in which the needs of
women and girls are included in all conflict situations,
and particularly in post-conflict rehabilitation and
reconstruction.

Lamentably, despite the progress made in recent
years, as a troop-contributing country we can say that in
the areas of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, civilians,
in particular women and girls, continue to be those
most severely affected by conflict and in post-conflict
situations. Likewise, the reports on women and children
show that they remain the most vulnerable sector in such
situations and the main physical and emotional victims
of sexual violence. Next year will mark the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
which will offer us the opportunity to assess good
practices, the progress achieved, and the shortcomings
and challenges remaining, and to consider identifying
new goals.

The situation of children born as a result of
violence is of great concern to us. They suffer social
stigma with grave economic and serious psychological
consequences. This is also true of forced marriages
of women and girls carried out by armed groups in
the situation of women victims of trafficking, sexual
slavery and forced displacement. We emphasize the
need for greater attention to be paid to restoration of the
rights and rehabilitation ofvictims of serious violations,
in particular in cases of abuse and sexual exploitation.

It is important to stress that in post-conflict
situations the number of women head of families
is on the rise. It is therefore critical to guarantee the
economic and social rights of women in such contexts.
Moreover, promoting accountability is another vital
element, and to that end the United Nations system
must continue to combat impunity for the perpetrators
of such violations, promote national capacity-building,
and work with regional actors to promote international
justice mechanisms and support the work of women's
human rights organizations.

Uruguay considers the women and peace and
security agenda to be part and parcel ofa broader agenda
closely linked to those on children in armed conflict
and the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
therefore believe that it is vital to move forward in as
coordinated a way as possible to achieve synergy, avoid
duplication of efforts, and most effectively to avail
ourselves of the United Nations instruments in the
field. One of these - peacekeeping operations - is
certainly very significant, in which civilian protection
mandates have been incorporated in recent years, with
particular attention to women and children.

Significant progress has been made. However,
regular attacks on civilian populations, particularly
in zones of deployment of missions, highlight the
ongoing limitations to meeting the expectations of
locals populations and the international community.
Many of these limitations can be corrected by clear and
predictable strategies that are attuned to each mission;
better coordination among the various actors in the field,
particularly in relations with the host State, which bears
the primary responsibility for protection; and greater
resources, which are absolutely necessary, among
other measures. Particular attention must also be paid
to the need for full adherence to the code of conduct
on the part of all those in United Nations contingents
deployed in the field, on the basis of zero tolerance.
We are therefore concerned by the persistance of sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping missions.

The natural feedback between protection and
participation is probably the core concept emerging from
resolution 1325 (2000), in which the Council reaffirmed
the important role played by women in preventing and
resolving conflicts and in peacebuilding. In that regard,
we are concerned over the low representation of women
at various levels. Uruguay has been in the vanguard
of incorporating women into the armed forces, as
evidenced in the number of women deployed by the
armed forces and the national police in the Uruguayan
contingents of peacekeeping missions. In our capacity
as volunteers, we have developed and documented
very significant statistics revealing our commitment
to the goals of these missions. We therefore reiterate
the importance of continuing to promote the greater
participation of women in the various areas linked to the
peace processes, providing an undeniable qualitative
contribution.

In conclusion, we remain committed to the
development and implementation of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict agenda, with particular
attention to women and children. We do so by means
of our work here at Headquarters and through our Blue
Helmets in the field. We also reiterate the importance of
establishing the broadest possible basis for this agenda.
The participation of so many countries in today's debate
bears witness to that commitment.

