Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I should like to start
by thanking the Deputy Secretary-General for
the informative briefing on the first joint African
Union-United Nations high-level visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and northern Nigeria, in the
context of Security Council resolution 2242 (2015), on
women and peace and security.

We express our appreciation to the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her
efforts and commitment and are gratified to see the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union on the women and peace and security agenda. We
also thank Ambassador Tete Antonio for his remarks.

The use of sexual violence as a tactic by Boko
Haram terrorists in northern Nigeria has indeed been a
matter of serious concern affecting the lives of women
and children in a tragic and painful manner. The same
victims are also the most affected segments of society
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Internally
displaced persons, particularly women and girls in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern
Nigeria, including those in the camps, continue to face
specific protection risks as a result of the situation of
vulnerability in which they find themselves and the
lack of sustainable solutions to respond thereto.

It is critical that the root causes of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo be addressed and that
the threats posed by Boko Haram in northern Nigeria
be effectively handled so as to reduce and eliminate the

vulnerabilities of women and girls in conflict-affected
areas and prevent further displacement. This would
require giving greater attention to the integration of
women in the peace and security agenda, particularly
in addressing the specific needs and vulnerabilities of
women and girls in their protection challenges. Herein
lies the value of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
relevant Council resolutions on women and peace
and security.

We recognize the importance of further
strengthening the emergency preparedness and
response so as to provide effective protection and
achieve sustainable solutions for those internally
displaced as a result of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and northern Nigeria,
particularly women and children. It is in this context
that we would like to stress the need to strengthen the
collaboration between humanitarian and development
actors to find sustainable solutions for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and northern Nigeria, particularly in
supporting the provision of basic services, livelihoods
and the deployment of opportunities for IDPs as well
as the necessary infrastructure, including within
the framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063.

This would contribute to reducing and eliminating
the vulnerabilities of internally displaced women and
girls, and reduce their dependence on humanitarian
assistance. That is why we appreciate the attention
given by the Deputy Secretary-General to the need to
link humanitarian and development responses in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern Nigeria.
We encourage her to persist in this noble endeavour.

Finally, I would like to conclude by affirming the
strong commitment of Ethiopia to working with all
relevant actors in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda and in ensuring the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and relevant subsequent
resolutions aimed at enhancing the participation and
engagement of women, women leaders and groups
in prevention, conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding activities.

