Mr. Dauth (Australia): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for having convened this meeting. I wish
also to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno, High
Commissioner Louise Arbour and Executive Director
Thoraya Obaid for their presentations. I should like to
say to Ms. Arbour that Australia is delighted to have
her here in New York, and delighted with her
appointment. It is wonderful to have a strong and able
High Commissioner in place.

We are proud to reaffirm our commitment to
resolution 1325 (2000), which remains a landmark
document both for the Council in its recognition of the
true dimensions of peace-building and for its
international recognition of the particular burden
women and girls bear as a result of conflict.

In Australia, community organizations have held
public seminars to make the provisions of resolution
1325 (2000) widely known. The Women's International
League for Peace and Freedom has been given
Government funding for a web site which provides
comprehensive information on resolution 1325 (2000).
Through our aid programme, we have provided training
on the resolution to the Australian Defence Force and
to military personnel from the Asia-Pacific region.

Australia has prepared an issues paper that
outlines the latest research and best practice on
women's roles in peacekeeping in Asia and the Pacific.
From our research, we are developing practical aid
policy guidelines which will encourage the role of
women in peace-building projects.

In recognition of the responsibilities which
individual States have, we are incorporating the
concepts of resolution 1325 (2000) into our
development cooperation programmes. In the
Philippines, we are funding the implementation of a
national survey on the participation of women in peace,
governance and development. That survey will be a
milestone in highlighting the concerns of women in the
areas of peace, governance and development. We are
also funding a conference bringing together women
from Mindanao, Cambodia, Timor-Leste, Afghanistan
and Solomon Islands to develop awareness of the role
of women in post-conflict rehabilitation and
reconstruction.

The international community more generally has
made some progress, too, in pursuit of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, for
example, is the first treaty to recognize certain acts of
sexual and gender violence as among the most serious
crimes under international law.

So, many positive steps have been taken
nationally and internationally to implement the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), but, as we have
said at previous meetings, much more needs to be
done. We must make sure that women participate
effectively at all levels of peace operations and
processes. Equally important, we must ensure that men
receive training in understanding women's rights and
the role of women in peace-building.

It is crucial that we consider gender dimensions
of conflict as being integral to the achievement of
sustainable and lasting peace. Only then will we
achieve a balanced perspective and arrive at balanced
solutions. Resolution 1325 (2000) provides the
guidance to do this.

We must ensure that the basic principles of
conflict prevention, the participation of women in
peace and security and the specific protection needs of
women are incorporated into the work of the Council,
other agencies of the United Nations, the international
community more generally and individual Member
States. Australia is committed to playing its part in this
respect.

