The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Canada,
Colombia, Croatia, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland,
Germany, Guatemala, Guinea, Iceland, Indonesia,
Israel, Kenya, Lesotho, Myanmar, the Netherlands,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, the Sudan, Sweden and Uganda, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries

took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, the Security Council has extended
invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, and
Ms. Carolyn McAskie, Assistant Secretary-General in
the Peacebuilding Support Office.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
2

Ms. Christine Miturumbwe, Coordinator of the
Dushirehamwe Association, and Ms. Maria Dias,
President of the Rede Feto.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Miturumbwe and Ms. Dias to take
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2006/770, containing the report of the Secretary-
General on women, peace and security. I should like to
draw the attention of the members to document
S/2006/793, containing a letter dated 4 October 2006
from Japan addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper for this meeting.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

By way of introduction, I would like to say that it
is a particular pleasure for me to open the debate today
to discuss the implementation of the important
resolution, resolution 1325 (2000). Our theme is the
roles of women in the consolidation of peace.

I wish to convey to our British colleague,
Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones Parry, and other
colleagues from the Permanent Mission of the United
Kingdom our appreciation for their dedication and
professionalism in organizing the Arria formula
meeting held yesterday. It was valuable for Council
members and other concerned people to gain greater
insight into the challenges and the lessons learned by
hearing the voices of real experience on the ground as
expressed by the representatives of civil society. We
hope to intensify the efforts in further implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) with the cooperation and
partnership of civil society.

Finally, I would like to thank all speakers in
advance. I can assure them that their observations and
06-58727
recommendations will be well received and will be a
subject for future reflection in the Council.

I now give the floor to Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women.


