Mr. Ke (Cambodia): Allow me to express my
condolences and sympathy for those who lost beloved
family members in the recent terrorist attacks in Sri
Lanka. Cambodia strongly condemns the attacks and
remains united with the Government and people of Sri
Lanka during this difficult period.

At the outset, I would like to thank Germany for
having convened today's highly important debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
informative report (S/2019/280) on conflict-related
sexual Violence, as well as to express my delegation's
appreciation to the briefers for their insightful
presentations on the subject this morning.

The use of sexual violence as a tactic of war and a
means of repression, terror and control is reprehensible.
My delegation strongly condemns all forms of sexual
violence and exploitation, especially against women
and children. In order to prevent the victimization of
women and girls, we must address the deep-rooted
causes of conflict. Conflict prevention is a prerequisite
for sustainable peace and respect for human rights.
Poverty, discrimination, a lack of education, social
exclusion and inequality perpetuate the cycle
of violence.
In that light, the international community must
come together in addressing these issues in a purposeful
and comprehensive manner. The timely implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can
provide real, long-lasting means of protection for
women and girls in times of conflict and in times of
peace. Women are the bedrock of global socioeconomic
development, yet despite the many advances, inequality
still persists. The successful implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly those
addressing gender equality, the promotion of quality
education and inclusive economic growth, can empower
women and aid in achieving their full potential.

Cambodia is fully committed to advancing the
goals of gender equality, prosperity and peace. For our
part, we have spared no effort in addressing human
security threats, as we have contributed to global
peace and stability through our active participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Cambodian
peacekeepers do their utmost to safeguard and protect
local populations from sexual violence and abuse by
upholding peace, preserving the rule of law and helping
to build safe and secure communities. Cambodia
supports the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy
for crimes committed by United Nations personnel
on missions.

In that context, Cambodia supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation contained in his report
that the continued training of all peacekeeping
personnel on issues relating to gender and conflict-
related sexual violence is of paramount importance.
In order to ensure the effectiveness of operations and
make peacekeeping missions a success, peacekeepers
should be professionally trained, be provided with
reliable field support and have access to necessary
modern technology.

Cambodia stands with the Secretary-General in
his efforts to strengthen prevention by ensuring the
criminal accountability of perpetrators. On the eve of
the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), it
is necessary to strengthen accountability mechanisms,
noting the resolution's call on all parties to armed
conflict to fully respect international law applicable to
the rights and protection of women and girls.

In our efforts to stamp out sexual violence and
abuse, the United Nations and its Member States must
work together in an open and cooperative manner. We
should strengthen the existing legal instruments for the
protection of women and girls in armed conflicts by
mainstreaming a gender perspective while promoting
survivor-focused care. Moreover, given that the
Secretary-General acknowledges that it is difficult to
ascertain the exact prevalence of conflict-related sexual
violence owing to a range of challenges, it is paramount
that reporting and recommendation documents be based
on accurate, verifiable data. Clarity in reporting will
aid in our understanding and help inform our action,
thereby strengthening the rule of law at the national and
international levels.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Cambodia's
unwavering resolve to protect vulnerable populations
in situations of armed conflict. Ending sexual violence
against women and girls requires joint global action,
and Cambodia is fully committed to working with all
our partners to ensure that future generations live free
and in peace.

