Mr. Amayo (Kenya): Kenya joins other Member
States in thanking Germany for convening this
important and timely debate under the women and
peace and security agenda.

Indeed, 2019 is a seminal year. It leads to the
twentieth anniversary of the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security, championed
by Namibia in 2000, and marks the tenth anniversary
of the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Addressing sexual violence in conflict is a
collective endeavour, not just a Government, Security
Council or women's affair. Creating awareness and
ownership of the objective and process must involve the
whole of society in order to achieve sustainable results.

Kenya recognizes the importance of military
training and accountability at all levels of engagement,
including for peacekeeping missions. Rape is violence
and a basic violation of an individual human right. We
have also noted that at times men and boys have been
neglected as the ignored victims of sexual and gender-
based violence during conflict, and in order to curb
that, our interventions should be more inclusive. The
mainstreaming of the role of gender advisers within
peacekeeping missions is a welcome development,
although more can still be done.

In 2016, Kenya inaugurated a national action
plan with strategies for strengthening its judicial
mechanisms and ensuring justice in a survivor-centred
approach, as well as developing appropriate policy and
legislation. That has ensured a conflict- and gender-
sensitive approach to addressing matters pertaining
to gender-based violence. The Government has gone
further, partnering with civil-society organizations
in order to translate the plan into various local
languages as an outreach initiative. The plan's goals
include, first, the active and increased participation of
women at all decision-making levels in all institutions
and mechanisms for the prevention, management
and resolution of conflict in key positions in the
peace-conflict continuum, including senior posts in
the military, the political arena and public service. We
have also established a task force on women and peace
and security within a gender-sector working group,
as a platform that brings together State and non-State
actors to advance our national priorities on gender in
addition to integrating women and peace and security
into the country's development plans. We have provided
guidelines for training military and police personnel
on issues of sexual and gender-based violence, with
essential procedures focused on the diverse needs of
survivors at the grass-roots level. Those efforts have
resulted in increased dignity for survivors, more
reporting of sexual and gender-based violence and a
reduction in the stigma that survivors face.

My delegation recognizes and supports the African
Union's zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence
in times of conflict or peace through its initiatives,
including the African Union Solemn Declaration
on Gender Equality in Africa. We strongly believe
that accountability for sexual violence should be
enhanced everywhere. Strengthening national criminal
jurisdictions and ensuring strict compliance with the
applicable standards under international humanitarian
law are important. International action to end sexual
violence as a tool of war should go beyond individual
criminal responsibility for crimes committed for
military purposes by the rank and file and should rather
focus more on assigning collective responsibility to the
entire command for such crimes. As we approach the
twentieth anniversary ofresolution 1325 (2000) in 2020,
we urge Member States to continue working to create
an environment that enables women and young people
to actively engage in peace and security processes at
all levels.

