Mr. Ali: At the outset, Sir, I would like to thank
you for giving me the opportunity to address the
Security Council in my capacity as President of the
Economic and Social Council on the important issue of
women, peace and security.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
are cross-cutting issues for all development policies
and, indeed, increasingly for all international policies.
The Economic and Social Council has taken the full
dimension of this requirement and reviews on an
annual basis how the United Nations system
mainstreams gender perspectives in its activities. This
exercise is of much relevance to the activities carried
out in the field of peace and security, as many of the
issues at stake are multifaceted.

Over the years, the Economic and Social Council
has promoted a comprehensive approach to peace,
stability and development. Its discussions on the
transition from relief to development, leading to
groundbreaking agreed conclusions in 1998 and an
annual follow-up process at the Council's substantive
sessions, are based on the demonstrated need to
integrate relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development into a continuum that increases the
coherence of international support. Peacebuilding is an
additional dimension of international efforts that can
now be added to this approach. The Council's Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti has also formulated specific
recommendations on the gender dimension of
international support to Haiti. I invite the Security
Council to take them into account.

Violence against women in conflict and post-
conflict situations is both a development and a security
challenge that calls for action on a common front by
United Nations Charter and other intergovernmental
bodies. Violence against women profoundly affects not
only the health and safety of women but also the
political, economic and social stability of their nations.
As such, United Nations intergovernmental bodies -
in particular, the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and its
Commission on the Status of Women, as well as the
Peacebuilding Commission - all have a role to play in
fostering international action to eliminate this scourge
and deliver results.

I therefore wish to suggest a sharing of tasks
among these various bodies in order to accelerate
mutually reinforcing efforts in this crucial field. For
example, the Economic and Social Council could
ensure follow-up and monitoring of the indicators
developed by its Statistical Commission on violence
against women. Given its strong experience in
reviewing the achievement of development objectives,
particularly the Millennium Development Goals, the
Council could engage in this task with the real know-
how and institutional backup of the United Nations
system at large.

2010 has been a very constructive year for the
promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of
women at the United Nations. The Commission on the
Status of Women reviewed the Beijing Platform for
Action in March; the Economic and Social Council
adopted a ministerial declaration on the matter in July
following its annual ministerial review devoted to
gender equality and the empowerment of women; and
the General Assembly decided on the creation of
UNWomen in July, a major step forward for the
operationalization of United Nations work in this field.

2011 will provide important opportunities to
follow up on those events. At its coordination segment
in July, the Economic and Social Council will review
the coordinated follow-up and implementation of the
ministerial declaration adopted this year. In so doing, it
will focus on the further mainstreaming of the gender
dimension in the work of the system at large and will
address the programmatic aspect of the work of
UN Women. The specific constituency, institutional
weight and networks of the Council, which relate to
what is commonly presented as its convening power,
will be used to ensure the political significance and
broad visibility of this exercise. This opportunity could
be used for a joint event with the Peacebuilding
Commission in order to review the status of women in
peacebuilding settings. It could also be an opportunity
for a presentation by the President of the Security
Council to the Economic and Social Council.

By maintaining close dialogue among our
different bodies, we can strengthen the impact of the
United Nations voice in our common areas of work. I
trust that this meeting today has been a valuable step in
this direction.

