Ms. Mohammed: I wish to start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for convening today's important
debate on the theme "Women and peace and security:
sexual violence in conflict". I would also like to thank
Special Representative Pramila Patten, Dr. Denis
Mukwege, Ms. Nadia Murad, Ms. Amal Clooney and
Ms. Inas Miloud for their insightful and passionate albeit
troubling briefings. I also commend the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2019/280), which strongly
underlines sexual violence as a tactic of war - one
that must be addressed through a stronger survivor-
centred approach.

The year 2019 is an important year for the women
and peace and security agenda. Ten years ago, the
Security Council adopted the landmark resolution 1888
(2009), which established the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, of which I wish to acknowledge
and commend the tireless work and impact it is making
on thousands of lives. We are also stepping up our efforts
for the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), both at the policy
level and on the ground, to ensure that women are core
partners in the maintenance of international peace and
security, through participation in prevention, mediation
and post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction.
The African Union reiterates its profound
conviction that the women and peace and security
framework, based on Council resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1888 (2009) and subsequent Council resolutions,
remains a strong framework that guides our global
efforts to build more peaceful and sustainable societies.
In view of that, permit me to focus my statement on
three main points.

First, the AU recognizes that structural gender
inequalities and discrimination against women, girls
and vulnerable communities represent some of the
most profound root causes of conflict-related sexual
Violence. The disturbing reality is that sexual violence
continues to be a major tactic in the broader strategy of
parties to war and conflict. In that vein, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019), despite its
weaknesses, and we hope that it will send a strong
signal to perpetrators as we continue to defend the
victims of such heinous crimes.

The African Union, through and the Peace and
Security Department and the Office of the AU Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, have worked
very closely with the United Nations, through the
Office of the Deputy Secretary-General, the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and UN-
Women, to address that scourge. Together we have led
fact-finding solidarity missions to operationalize the
women and peace and security agenda in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, South Sudan, Chad and
Niger, respectively, over the past two years.

The findings brought some of the following
significant insights. Women, girls and vulnerable
communities remain the primary targets of organized
abductions, rape, forced marriages and sexual slavery
in times of conflict. Women and girls face considerable
levels of sexual exploitation in camps for internally
displaced persons or during migration, including in the
alarming form of sex for food. Women, girls, young men
and boys are targeted as suicide bombers by extremist
and terrorist groups. Finally, young men and boys also
suffer from conflict-related sexual violence, notably
from gang rape and forced nudity.

The African Union recognizes that those challenges
are made worse by the fact that, while policies have
by and large been put in place, their implementation
remains weak. It is in that perspective that the AU Peace
and Security Council adopted the Continental Results
Framework for Monitoring and Reporting on the
Implementation of the Women and Peace and Security
Agenda in Africa with a view to supporting member
States and other stakeholders in the acceleration of
delivery on commitments.

It is regrettably accurate that women remain the
principal victims of sexual and other forms of violence
and discrimination in times of conflict. Nonetheless,
they are also key partners as leaders at the community,
national and regional levels. And indeed, in addition
to the protection pillar, the AU is championing the
implementation of the women, peace and security
commitments, specifically the participation pillar,
with particular emphasis on the role and leadership of
women, peace processes and governance.

It is in that context that the AU has launched an
action-oriented network of women in mediation known
as FemWise-Africa, and has partnered with the United
Nations under the joint framework on peace and security
to enhance women's leadership in peace, security
and development with the African Women Leaders
Network, as recognized in resolution 2457 (2019).

Secondly, the African Union reaffirms its zero-
tolerance position when it comes to the issue of sexual
violence in conflict. One of the most outrageous
challenges we face remains the lack of criminal
accountability. Survivors have little chance of seeing
their offenders face justice.

At the continental level, in its 2018 Policy on
Prevention and Response to Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse for Peace Support Operations, the African Union
reaffirmed its full commitment to eradicating sexual and
gender-based violence in Africa. The AU has focused
on operationalizing its various instruments on sexual
and gender-based violence and sexual exploitation and
abuse through the work of the Office of the AU Special
Envoy, the Peace and Security Department and the
Women, Gender and Development Directorate.

At the level of AU member States, acts of violence
against women, such as rape, domestic violence and
other acts, have been criminalized in several countries.
In addition to the legal and policy approach to prevention,
African member States have also undertaken to build a
culture of peace and non-violence. I wish to recall that
African Heads of State and Government have declared

the period from 2010 to 2020 as the African Decade
for Women. In that context, training centres and
programmes have been developed to raise awareness of
the need to combat sexual and gender-based Violence, to
provide the necessary knowledge and to prevent those
deployed in peace-support missions from committing
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Thirdly, we must adopt an approach that is survivor-
centred and community-led when developing and
implementing programmes and policies that address
the needs of survivors. Their strength as survivors, as
shared by some ofthe briefers today, is inspiring, and we
must learn from them. The African Union offers robust
support to survivors, in partnership with African civil
society organizations and women-led organizations,
to provide health services, physical and psychological
support and legal and economic aid.

Article 14 of the Maputo Protocol guarantees the
respect and promotion of women's right to health,
including sexual and reproductive health. We do
recognize, however, that we need to continue to
enhance support for survivors, including medical and
psychosocial support and support for rehabilitation.

Finally, the AU fully recognizes that gender-
sensitive transitional justice should be an integral
part of peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction
processes. Transitional justice should take into account
women's and vulnerable communities' experiences
of violence; fully address the role and responsibility
of perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence;
and address how to overcome stigmatization, while
focusing on reintegration. It is our responsibility to
make that happen.

