Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like to
thank South Africa for bringing the Council's attention
to the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, which is so dear to Indonesia. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers, some of whom have travelled quite far to brief
us - namely, Ms. Diop, Ms. Salah and Ms. Ekomo. I
think that they have provided us with ample additional
information on this particular issue.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Philippines on
behalf of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN).

Indonesia's foreign policy accords special attention
to the issue of women. That was also clearly stated
once again yesterday in a policy speech by Mrs. Retno
Marsudi, the first female Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, who was just re-elected last week. The issue
of women will continue to be a priority for Indonesia
in the future. Given that this issue is the focus of our
debate in the Chamber today, I would also like to point
out something very important - over the past 15 years,
more than 50 per cent of the diplomats who have been
newly recruited every year in have been women. That
will make male ambassadors like me extinct in the
near future.

But the good news is that we will have more women
diplomats working as mediators and peacekeepers.
They are the people who will continue the quest for the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in the future. While I am proud in that regard,
as we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption ofresolution 1325 (2000), all ofus here should
ask ourselves what we have achieved on this particular
agenda. Are we moving forward? How far have we gone
in implementing the resolution to which we are proudly
committed? I note the latest report of the Secretary-
General on women and peace and security (S/2019/800)
and commend the inclusion of women's empowerment
and gender equality in most of the agreements reached
in peace processes.

However, just as all the briefers have reminded
us, the implementation of the agenda has proven
challenging. Much still needs to be done. Against that
backdrop, allow me to highlight three pertinent points.

First, we need to reaffirm our commitments
to accelerating progress on the women and peace
and security agenda, which is a strong platform for
transforming our words into actions. In many cases,
quotas for the representation of women have been in
place only in early stages and commitments to maintain
such quotas have not endured. Women are in fact not
only part of the solution, but have also been influential
in serving as a source of inspiration and as facilitators
of peace and security. We have experienced that in
Indonesia, and we will continue to pursue that agenda.
We feel and believe that women can have a positive
influence on their communities. We are therefore
committed to strengthening the role of women in
mitigating social conflict and countering violent
extremism. But commitments alone are not enough
if they are not coupled with detailed implementation,
a legal framework and on-the-ground action. In that
regard, we support the need for national action plans.

Secondly, we need to optimize available resources
and networks towards a whole-of-United Nations
approach, particularly in the current dynamic
landscape. In that context, we fully support the
initiative of the Global Alliance of Regional Women
Mediator Networks, which was launched last month
here at the United Nations. We believe that the Alliance
can make a significant impact in enhancing women's
participation at all levels of peace processes. Indonesia
itself has taken the initiative to host in April the
regional training on women and peace and security for
ASEAN women mediators in order to strengthen their
capacities in peace negotiations. We will continue to
support such initiatives. Indonesia also established the
ASEAN Women for Peace Registry, which is a regional
pool of experts to mainstream the role of women in our
regional peace agenda.
Thirdly, we should advance the role of women as
agents of peace. When women participate in peace
processes, the resulting agreement is 35 per cent more
likely to last at least 15 years. It therefore makes sense
that if we want to resolve conflicts, women must
be involved. Indonesia is an enthusiastic supporter
of women peacekeepers. They can win the hearts
and minds of local communities. Civilians also find
greater comfort in them when they seek protection
against sexual violence. Indonesia has deployed 128
women peacekeepers among nearly 3,000 Indonesian
troops. I am proud to say that when we visited Juba,
I met with several of our Indonesian women police
peacekeepers who have been serving in South Sudan.
We will continue to contribute more. We are currently
training several hundred women peacekeepers at our
training centre in Sentul, West Java. I would like to
echo the President in paying tribute to all our women
peacekeepers, including the peacekeeper from South
African in this Chamber today. They have done all of
us here at the United Nations an honour, and we will
continue to support their work.

I once again congratulate us all on our successful
adoption today of resolution 2493 (2019), but what
is more important is that it is timely as we work to
implement our commitments with the support of the
available resources, networks and personnel on the
ground. We should ensure that its provisions will be
fully and faithfully implemented, particularly our joint
commitment to promote the full, equal - I emphasize
full and equal - and meaningful participation ofwomen
in all stages of peace processes. In conclusion, I would
like to echo what our Foreign Minister, Mrs. Retno
Marsudi, has said on many occasions. She has always
reminded me that "investing in women equals investing
in peace". It is time for us all to invest substantially,
seriously and generously.

