The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council Chamber.
Their presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion. I would particularly
like to thank the Secretary-General, all our briefers,
all of our Ministers and all other speakers for their
flexibility as we had to move the debate from yesterday
to today because of the snowstorm. I am also extremely
grateful to the Secretariat and to my own team for their
innovative planning.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Colombia, Cote D'lvoire,
the Czech Republic, Djibouti, Estonia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, South Africa,
Spain, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey,
Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Ilwad Elman, of the
Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre; and Mr. Kevin
Hyland, Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner of
the United Kingdom.

Mr. Fedotov is joining today's meeting Via video-
teleconference from Vienna, and Ms. Elman is joining
via video-teleconference from Mogadishu.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Te'te
Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations; Ms. Urmila Bhoola, United Nations
Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Slavery,
including its Causes and Consequences; Her Excellency
Ms. Madina Jarbussynova, Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Representative
and Coordinator for Combating Trafficking in Human
Beings; His Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations; Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special
Representative of the INTERPOL to the United
Nations; Mr. Houtan Homayounpour, Senior Forced
Labour Specialist, International Labour Organization;
and Mr. Ashraf El Nour, Director, of the International
Maritime Organization Office to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/198, which contains a letter dated
7 March 2017 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

