Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I am delivering my
remarks on behalf of Latvia, Lithuania and my
own country, Estonia. We also align ourselves with
the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the
European Union.

First of all, we should mobilize our efforts to
achieve full gender equality in law and in practice. We
should address the gender stereotypes that are deeply
embedded in society and that often have an unconscious
impact on our actions. To counter those stereotypes,
women must be able to fully and effectively participate
in political, economic and social life. In that context, I
would like to commend the initiative of the Framework
of Cooperation signed in 2018 between the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Committee
on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination
Against Women.

Secondly, we must focus on accountability. We
must admit that despite increased attention from
the international community, impunity remains a
widespread and even common practice. Sexual violence
committed in wartime is one ofthe least reported crimes.
The survivors of violence are often further punished
with rejection and stigma. In ensuring accountability,
we want to stress the role of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The Rome Statute of the ICC provides
the international community with an excellent tool for
putting an end to impunity for sexual and gender-based
crimes, and we want to encourage all States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute and ensure
that their national laws fully incorporate the Rome
Statute crimes.

Thirdly, we should address the issue of the
implementation of existing commitments. We agree with
the Secretary-General that there are ways to address
the existing gaps in the compliance system and to put
those issues on the Security Council's agenda. With
regard to our implementation of our own commitments,
all three of our countries have taken steps to prepare
and advance national action plans on women and peace
and security. Latvia is about to start preparing its first
national action plan, which will include action based
on domestic policy as well as through multilateral
and bilateral cooperation. Lithuania is finalizing its
second national action plan for the period from 2020
to 2024, and Estonia is currently working on its third
national action plan for the same period, focusing on
the empowerment of women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict situations as well as on raising awareness
on conflict-related sexual violence.
Estonia is also contributing financially to the
activities of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the United Nations Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, and to the work of the ICC Trust Fund
for Victims. Lithuania has been contributing to the
Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund, which focuses
on directly supporting local women's organizations
engaged in conflict-affected areas, since it was
launched. During its current presidency of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) Latvia has prioritized the issue of
arms-related gender-based violence. The ATT makes a
critical contribution to global efforts to address gender-
based violence affected by the illicit proliferation and
misuse of arms, but it is clear that much more work and
political will is needed to address this issue, including
through arms export assessments.

I would also like to stress the crucial role of civil
society, particularly women's organizations, in fighting
sexual and gender-based crimes through prevention and
evidence-gathering, as well as by providing assistance
to survivors. In this connection, Lithuania organized
a three-day conference for international experts in
November 2018 on the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, with the aim ofbuilding
the capacities and enhancing the abilities of civil-
society organizations. Additionally, at a side event
organized by Estonia in March during the sixty-fourth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Pramila Patten, gave many interesting examples
of the technological opportunities that can be used
to help survivors. As stigmatization is almost always
part and parcel of victimization in sexual violence,
it would be interesting to hear any recommendations
the Special Representative may have for States on
how they can tackle this particular challenge with
technological means.

