Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank you, Madame President, and the United States of
America, for your initiative to convene this important
open debate. I would also like to thank Margot
Wallstrom, the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/604). I commend all
Council members for the adoption of resolution 1960
(2010), which Portugal had the honour to co-sponsor.
That action-oriented resolution is already a landmark,
and I am convinced that it will indeed make a
difference, especially for women and girls, in so many
parts of the world.

Portugal obviously shares the views that were
expressed by the European Union regarding the
implementation of the resolution, but let me underline
some aspects of particular significance to my country.
The excellent report before us today provides us with a
clear analytical framework for understanding sexual
violence in conflict as a threat to security and an
impediment to peacebuilding in situations on the
Council's agenda. It also examines the causes and
consequences of sexual violence in local communities,
as well as its consequences for the conflict and the
peace process itself. Moreover, the report provides us
with very useful information on the significant
progress made in implementing resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) with the appointment of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as with the
establishment of a Team of Experts on the Rule of Law,
in order to assist national authorities in reinforcing
judicial systems weakened by conflict.

We must recognize that much has been done. The
legal framework exists. Under international law, the
definition of sexual violence is clear and, depending on
the circumstances, can constitute a war crime, a crime
against humanity, an act of torture or a constituent act
of genocide. These crimes may entail individual
criminal responsibility, including that of commanders.

With the appointment of Special Representative
Wallstrom and, subsequently, of the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law, with the presence of United
Nations agencies and peacekeeping missions in the
field, the Council should have the tools necessary to
obtain reliable and accurate information on sexual
3
violence. This is an issue of particular importance to
helping the Council discharge its responsibilities.

Concerning the Council's action on this issue, we
believe that the Council has been quite successful but
that it still needs to reinforce its effectiveness. The
mass rapes in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo in July and August emphasize the need for
further action by the international community. We can
certainly consolidate and make full use of existing
tools by ensuring adequate funding for the Office of
the Special Representative and for the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law, and by assessing the need for
women's protection advisers in relevant peacekeeping
operations.

I would underline two aspects where the Council
could become more effective.

The first aspect is the need to improve the
Council's access to timely, objective, accurate and
reliable information on sexual violence in situations on
its agenda. In this regard, Portugal strongly supports
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General and the decision taken yesterday by
the Council to establish a monitoring and reporting
system on sexual violence in conflict in order to ensure
a coherent and coordinated approach at the field level
and at Headquarters. The good practices of the
mechanisms created by the Council to monitor the
situation of children in armed conflicts should guide
our action, and we hope that these mechanisms will
enjoy the same level of success to combat sexual
violence in armed conflicts.

The second aspect is the Council's action. Indeed,
a Council that is better informed is also in a better
position to take action. With sufficient information, the
Council will be able to take, in a timely manner,
further steps to influence parties to conflict to comply
with international law and to make specific
commitments regarding the prevention of sexual
violence or the investigation of alleged abuses.
However, if these measures do not restrain the
perpetration of sexual violence, the Council needs to
follow-up on resolution 1888 (2009). In this regard,
Portugal welcomes the decision of the Council to use
information available in the reports of the Secretary-
General as a basis for a more focused United Nations
engagement with those responsible for such acts. This
should be understood as sending a clear message to
perpetrators of sexual Violence that the Council is
ready to apply sanctions to perpetrators who have been
identified or who are credibly suspected of committing
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict on its
agenda.

Finally, let me assure the Council of our constant
support to the Special Representative in her difficult
but very important tasks.

