Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to first
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
for her comprehensive briefing on her visit to Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I commend
her for her inspirational leadership. I would also like to
thanks Ambassador Tete Antonio for his briefing.

Following the 19 April signing of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security by Secretary-
General Guterres and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, the
second joint United Nations-African Union high-level
trip has been significant in focusing on the meaningful
participation of women in peace reconciliation, security
and development. Such collaborative efforts must not
only continue but also be intensified in order to bring
the two organizations closer to reaching the targets
of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda and the Paris Agreement.

We have to help the region overcome the challenges
of eradicating poverty and achieving inclusive and
sustainable growth. We must support Africa's steady
pursuit of stability and transformative, sustainable
development. In that context, the predominant emphasis
must be placed on the involvement of woman and
youth, as well as their right to human dignity without
any form of degradation. Therefore, we encourage
strengthening the growing cooperation between the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the African
Union Commission and the Security Council on gender
and youth issues.
The African peace and security architecture and
the Silence the Guns by 2020 initiative will bring a new
focus on preventive diplomacy, which cannot succeed
without the support of the international community.
Therefore, in all negotiations, woman and youth, who
constitute the majority of the population, must inherit
and shape a continent that is free from conflict in all
forms, especially violence against women.

We will reach our goals only if we pursue a
significant dialogue between the United Nations and the
African Union on implementing resolution 2242 (2015).
We must also integrate the women and peace and security
agenda across all of the Council's activities, including
United Nations system programmes, the mandate of the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on
issues related to sexual abuse, as well as work related to
women and children in armed conflict and international
organizations. Therefore, Kazakhstan will stand by all
peace initiatives in Nigeria, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and elsewhere, which have to incorporate
bottom-up and top-down strategies that will bring
about transformation.

The situation related to women's rights in the
countries that the Deputy Secretary-General visited
is extremely fragile and alarming. The situations in
Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have been aggravated by ongoing military actions of
armed groups, particularly Boko Haram. Therefore,
every effort must be made to ensure the protection
of the human rights of women, keeping in mind that
the African Union pays special attention to that issue
through the recently established Pan African Women's
Association, which has been classified as a specialized
agency of the African Union.

We must also pay full attention to the dire
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which greatly impacts women and girls, who
represent the largest number of internally displaced
persons and refugees. More than 11 million people
have been affected by the humanitarian crisis and more
than two-thirds of those 11 million are women and
girls. We believe that United Nations agencies, regional
organizations and international donors must elaborate
a single, comprehensive strategy for the region in order
to increase the volume of humanitarian aid and ensure
that that aid reaches those in need. We express special
appreciation and call for support to be provided to the
Government and the people of Uganda, Ethiopia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Tanzania and other
countries that have kept their doors open for refugees
fleeing from conflict.
It is especially important to further support the
African Union's efforts to increase the role of women
in strengthening the human rights, security and
development nexus, which is essential for stabilizing the
overall situation in those countries. We are convinced
that long-term stability and sustainable peace can only
be achieved by investing in the strong connection
between peace, security and development. Therefore,
we should address the root causes of the crisis in the
region and create better opportunities for education and
employment for the next generation. Kazakhstan will
always stand for the engagement and contribution of
women and youth in all phases of mediation, conflict
resolution, post-conflict recovery and long-term
development in the joint efforts of the United Nations
and the African Union.

We commend the launch of the African Women
Leaders Network's, which was initiated on 2 June
by the African Union Commission, UN-Women and
Germany. The Network seeks to enhance the leadership
of women in the transformation of Africa. It focuses on
governance, peace and stability.

To conclude, we emphasize the crucial need for
development programmes in the aforementioned
countries visited by Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and throughout the whole African
continent. The close link between security and
development is very important, particularly in the
region but also in the world as a whole. That is because
the nexus of security and development is actively
working on addressing many ongoing issues. We need
to support interdependence across the pillars of the
United Nations.

