Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I commend the German
presidency of the Security Council and Her Excellency
Ms. Ursula von der Leyen for highlighting the important
role that women play in peacekeeping. I wish to express
my warm appreciation to the Secretary-General and
today's briefers for their insightful briefings, which
indicate that there is still a wide gap between word
and deed when it comes to the women and peace and
security agenda.

As the Secretary-General has envisioned, we must
place gender parity at the highest level across the United
Nations. To that end, we need to implement his peace and
security architecture reform with greater collaboration
between the Department of Peace Operations, the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
UN-Women, both in the field and at Headquarters.
Transformative change should be realized across all
three pillars of the United Nations, in which women
can be key catalysts and dynamic agents of progress.
Only in that way will United Nations peacekeeping
continue to be an important tool for conflict prevention
and resolution.

We have to work hard if we want to increase the
number of women in military and police contingents by
2020. That means that we need to encourage women to
join the armed forces by breaking the stranglehold of
patriarchy, cultural norms and taboos against women,
creating new shifts in community awareness. Women
need to be empowered, not just in peacekeeping
operations but in daily societal life, through
investments in development, their education, economic
opportunities and leadership training. It is important
that they come to the forefront to lay the foundations
for peaceful and stable societies, as resolution 1325
(2000) advocates.

Current statistics demonstrate that countries
around the world deploy women to the United Nations
at far lower levels than they are represented in domestic
security forces. Many nations currently have women
who are qualified to serve but are overlooked for training
and field placement opportunities. That bypassing of
women must be reversed. Women must also be given
information about career opportunities in security
forces, often concealed because ofa false sense ofmale
prerogative or prohibitions on the grounds of family
duties or being at a greater risk of harm and attacks
than men.

An erroneous belief also exists that the presence of
women will decrease unit cohesion and effectiveness
because of sexual violence within units. In fact, it
has been found that female peacekeepers improve
unit performance and help military commanders to
fulfil their mandates. Even in communities, sexual
exploitation and abuse is greatly reduced with the
presence of women in peacekeeping operations. They
also have better access to communities and can act
as information conduits, and thereby provide early
warning and contribute to security and community
well-being.

In addition, current United Nations performance
measures do not track the number, rank or function
of female peacekeepers, whether units have been
trained to prevent conflict-related sexual violence,
or whether the vetting systems correctly identify
peacekeepers credibly suspected of sexual exploitation
and abuse. We therefore need to rightfully introduce
those measures, which are critical to the fulfilment
of peacekeeping mandates, to be added to the United
Nations performance system.

To truly succeed, we need women's empowerment
in times of war and peace. Most of all, it is critical to
build capacity in women through South-South, North-
South and trilateral cooperation and to empower them
to be leaders capable of engaging in early warning,
mediation, peace negotiations, peace agreements and
confidence-building measures, from the local and
regional to the national and international levels. We
encourage donor countries to prioritize educational

programmes, allocate a greater number of scholarships
to women and girls from conflict-affected countries and
enable victims to transcend and take on leadership roles.
Everything we have recommended is what we are
implementing in our own country. It is in that spirit
that we are preparing our peacekeepers at the Kazakh
peacekeeping training centre. Kazakhstan is fully
committed to United Nations peacekeeping operations
and is sending highly qualified and competent
personnel, including females. Our female peacekeepers
are deployed in the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara, and we plan to
further increase their numbers by deploying them to
other missions.

To conclude, we will join others in fully
implementing the women and peace and security agenda.

