Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate, and we thank
those who have offered briefings this morning. As a
delegation that has supported resolution 1325 (2000) in
its entirety since it was adopted, we agree that progress
towards achieving its major goals has been slow and
uneven. That is particularly true with regard to the low
number of women appointed as Special Envoys and the
continuing underrepresentation of women in formal
peace processes and in peacekeeping missions. Your
concept paper, Mr. President, and the report of the
Secretary-General make it clear that we must
considerably strengthen our efforts in that respect. We
hope that the input provided during this debate will
finally, eight years after the adoption of the resolution,
lead to significant improvements.

Appointing more women to leading positions
would have a catalytic effect and truly empower
women affected by armed conflict. It would strengthen
the perception that women are stakeholders 4 as
opposed to mere victims or aid recipients. A few years
ago, our then Permanent Representative in New York,
Ambassador Fritsche, headed a group of like-minded
ambassadors that tried to work towards an increase in
the number of women in such positions. The group met
regularly to exchange views and met with the
Secretary-General for joint lobbying efforts. It was
later taken over by the United Kingdom representative,
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, but their effort was thereafter
discontinued.

Several years later, it is sad to note that almost no
progress has been made. Despite repeated expressions
of good intent from all sides, a single woman currently
serves as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and women account for 28 per cent of higher-
category civilian staff in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. We therefore fully support
and reiterate today the call addressed to the Secretary-
General by the Women's Leaders Working Group to
establish, as a matter of high priority, a mechanism to
increase the number of women in such positions as
United Nations Special Representatives and Envoys, as
well as heads of peace operations.

Existing programmes to increase the leadership
and peacemaking capacities of women must be further
expanded. We also believe that the creation of a gender
unit within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
would contribute to that goal. With the adoption this
year of Presidential No. Statement 36, the Security
Council noted that women have an important role to
play in mediation and the settlement of disputes. In
particular at the grass-roots level, their role can be
significantly more important than that of men. The
Council must therefore institutionalize women's equal
and substantive participation at all levels of peace
processes and create mechanisms to monitor their
equal participation systematically.
There is a clear link between an increase in
women's participation in peacekeeping missions and
the potentially lower level of sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Since girls and
women in affected regions often associate uniformed
personnel with sexual violence, a higher number of
women participating in peacekeeping and police forces
will dramatically enhance the access of victims to
social and psychological services, including trauma
counselling and information-sharing on sexual
harassment, abuse and rape.

Most importantly, of course, those who are
supposed to provide protection must not, under any
circumstances, themselves become perpetrators. All
acts of sexual violence committed by peacekeeping
personnel, including sexual exploitation and child
prostitution, are unacceptable. They heavily undermine
the credibility and effectiveness of any peace
operation, but also of the Organization as a whole.
Zero tolerance can therefore be the only policy in that
respect.

The ultimate goal must be that the attitude and
behaviour of peacekeepers towards women can serve
as a model for local communities. Furthermore, the
mandates of peacekeeping missions must provide clear
guidance, especially for commanders, on how to
protect civilians, in particular girls and women, from
sexual violence. Predeployment and on-mission
30
training programmes must instruct police, security and
humanitarian personnel on how to recognize and react
to incidents of sexual violence.

Sexual violence is one of the most important
aspects of resolution 1325 (2000). While it has always
been part of armed conflicts, its systematic and
targeted use in numerous situations today is not just a
by-product of hostilities, or even just a war crime as
recognized in the Rome Statute. It often is a method of
warfare that aims to destroy the social fabric of
communities in order to achieve political and military
ends. It is against that background that we
co-sponsored resolution 1820 (2008) on the protection
of civilians from all forms of sexual violence.

We also welcome the adoption of presidential
statement 2008/28 on children in armed conflict,
referring to resolution 1820 (2008), and repeat our call
for targeted sanctions against perpetrators of acts of
sexual violence.

