Mr. Moura (Portugal): I would like to thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening today's open
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, for their remarks.

Let me start by commending Ms. Bangura for her
excellent work in recent months and for her efforts to
prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
Portugal welcomes the recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/l49), which identifies current and
emerging concerns relating to sexual violence in a
number of countries, such as Syria, the Central African
Republic, Mali, Libya and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We particularly welcome the fact that the report
discloses new trends and the use of several forms
of sexual violence as a tactic of war against not
only women and girls but also men and boys. Other
interesting elements set out in the report include the
connection between sexual violence and the illicit
extraction of natural resources and the connection
between sexual violence and the failure of security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. Moreover, the report gives
a clear and comprehensive idea of the intensive follow-
up and advocacy work carried out worldwide by the
current and former Special Representatives to advance
the fight against conflict-related sexual violence.

The Security Council has recognized that the
protection of women is a critical priority for peace
and security. Resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
clearly establish the fight against sexual violence in its
agenda. The Council has created the necessary tools
to obtain reliable and accurate information on sexual
violence: a common definition of sexual violence and
common methodologies for data collection through
a monitoring and reporting mechanism are now used
throughout the system. Another promising tool at the
disposal of Member States is the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law, and Portugal welcomes the technical
cooperation that was provided at the request of national
authorities in six countries, including Cote d'Ivoire,
South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
National accountability needs to be reinforced,
as Member States bear the primary responsibility to
prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence by
strengthening of the capacities of national institutions,
in particular health, judicial and social systems. The
action of the international community must also be
reinforced. The deployment of women protection
advisers in the relevant peacekeeping operations, so as
to strengthen the prevention of and response to sexual
violence, needs to be accelerated in order to ensure that
dedicated capacity on sexual violence exists within
peacekeeping and political missions. The challenges
that have delayed the deployment of such advisers must
be overcome. We are encouraged by arrangements that
have allowed the deployment of such advisers in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, but we also note that women
protection advisers are urgently needed in Mali, Syria
and Libya, as mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General.

All of the information contained in the report
is relevant for the Security Council in terms of its
Charter-mandated responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The information that
has already been collected by the reporting mechanism
will make it possible for the Council to have access to
"timely, objective, accurate and reliable information"
on sexual violence in conflict. With such information,
the Council will also be able to take further steps. That
should be understood as a clear message to perpetrators
of sexual violence that the Council is ready to apply
sanctions or to use all other means at its disposal,
including referrals to the International Criminal Court,
against perpetrators that have been identified as having
committed sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict.

The Council needs to be consistent in its decisions
and reinforce the message that impunity is simply not
acceptable, sexual violence is simply not tolerable and
there can be no genuine security without women's
security.

Let me conclude my statement with a word for
the survivors of sexual violence. They are at the
centre of our debates. Let us not forget them and the
fact that, beyond bringing perpetrators to justice, the
international community also needs to afford care and
reparation to women and girls and men and boys that
have been victims of sexual violence in conflict-related
situations.
