Ms. Bokhari (Norway): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden, and my own
country, Norway.

Trafficking in persons, including forced labour
and slavery, is a grave violation and abuse of human
rights. It also constitutes a serious form of organized
crime, sometimes supported by State actors and often
conducted with impunity. Such criminal networks
exploit displaced persons and have a catalytic effect
on migration. Billions of dollars are generated each
year, fuelling conflict and terrorism and hampering
development. Women and children are particularly
exposed to trafficking, often in the form of sexual slavery
and forced labour or recruitment as child soldiers.

For terrorist groups such as Da'esh, Boko Haram
and Al-Qaida, trafficking and slavery do lasting
harm to individuals and are tools used to humiliate
and terrorize populations, as well as to raise money
for their operations. Children in armed conflict also
need to be protected from trafficking and exploitation.
International law has to be respected, and parties to a
conflict must take responsibility and act to protect and
address violations and abuses. The Secretary-General's
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/36l)
confirms the existence of an evolving criminal
infrastructure designed to exploit refugees and migrants
through human trafficking, and sexual slavery.

We must make better and more effective use of
international organizations and instruments such as
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime to ensure effective international
cooperation across borders and regions. As trafficking
in persons and armed conflicts converge and become
global security challenges, we need to develop combined
tools from the security and development communities.
Those threats are both causes and effects of conflict.

We need to improve conflict analysis and
cooperation through data sharing and monitoring
between countries and across United Nations entities.
We welcome Secretary-General Guterres' initiative
to strengthen the United Nations conflict and threat
analysis in that regard.

We also need better gender-disaggregated data and
documentation in order to develop effective responses
and services for female and male victims of sexual
exploitation. Trafficking has a clear gender dimension,
which is also recognized in Security Council resolution
2331 (2016).

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
gives us an important platform to tackle trafficking
in a more holistic manner. Sustainable Development
Goal 16, on peaceful societies, specifically calls for the
end of abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of
violence against and torture of children. Implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda brings
women's voices and experience to the table. Again, the
peace, security and development architecture needs to
be coherent and mutually supportive.

The Nordic countries are strongly committed to
tackling all forms of trafficking and organized crime.
We are already deeply engaged in anti-trafficking
programs, in partnership with developing countries
and regional organizations. We believe it is important
to further strengthen multilateral cooperation and
partnerships. In line with Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), we also need to engage
more women and young people in both peacebuilding
activities and actions to combat human trafficking.

