Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Permanent Observer of the
African Union, Mr. Tete Antonio, for their useful and
detailed briefings. We would also like to commend
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Pramila Patten.

Preventing and resolving conflicts is a necessary
precondition for ensuring stability and sustainable
development and for promoting and protecting human
rights. We support the work of the African Union and
subregional bodies in their roles regarding conflict
prevention and resolution, since it is precisely those
organizations that have the best information concerning
the situation on the ground and the possibilities for
peaceful settlement. We also favour strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.

The issue of women and peace and security is an
integral part of the overall peace process and post-
conflict peacebuilding. The African Union five-year
Gender, Peace and Security Programme 2015-2020
is a clear example of a regional initiative to bolster
women's participation in peace processes. It is also
important to ensure that such work is not merely
declamatory but leads to specific results in connection
with improving women and girls' status in conflict and
post-conflict societies.

We are concerned about ongoing reports of sexual
violence perpetrated by terrorist groups, such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram.
We categorically condemn that criminal practice used
by terrorists. We urge States to cooperate actively in
combating the shadow economy of terrorists who
benefit financially from human trafficking, sexual
slavery and forced prostitution. We support the work
ofthe multinational armed forces comprised of African
troops to combat Boko Haram.

We concur with our colleagues' concerns that the
deteriorating situation in the Congolese provinces
of Kasai is harming women and children. We are
concerned about the escalating confrontation between
the authorities and tribal armed militias in those
provinces. The Government and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo need to take additional measures
to diffuse the situation. We would, however, like to warn
against indiscriminately blaming what is happening
on the Congolese troops and police for their allegedly
disproportionate use of force. Members of the Kamwina
Nsapu militia are also to blame. They are attacking
Government officials, schools and polling stations and
recruiting child soldiers. That cannot justify human
rights violations by law enforcement agencies. We
nonetheless need to wait for the outcome of the official
investigation by the authorities.

We believe that the root causes of that problem
should be addressed by assisting the Congolese
authorities to reform their security sector so as to
ensure that law enforcement agents uphold human
rights. The implementation of the human rights due
diligence policy needs to be carried out more cautiously,
as it does not allow for the building of the capacity of
law enforcement agencies, but as a consequence the
military and political situation is failing to improve
and there seems to be a vicious cycle. We believe
that in order to improve stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the comprehensive political
agreement of 31 December 2016 needs to be upheld by
all Congolese parties.

The protection of women in armed conflict from

the threat of sexual violence is the primary task of the
Governments of States involved in conflicts. We would
therefore like to particularly highlight the measures
taken by the Government of Nigeria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to combat gender and sexual
violence in armed conflict, including combating
impunity for that type of crime, deploying female police
officers in camps for internally displaced persons and
refugee camps, providing medical, psychological and
legal assistance to the survivors of such violence and
helping them in social and economic reintegration. We
believe that the international community, including
the United Nations, faces a significant challenge in
helping build national capacity related to combating
and preventing violence against women and girls
in armed conflict and in assisting national efforts to
improve women's participation in conflict prevention
and resolution.

