Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to thank all ofthe
briefers in today's debate for their powerful messages,
which the Security Council should take into account
in its future deliberations. I would also like to thank
the United Kingdom for organizing this important and
timely debate, while acknowledging their important
contribution to combating sexual violence in conflict
situations during its tenure leading the Group of Eight.
1 would also like to commend Australia and Guatemala
for organizing an Arria formula meeting on experiences
drawn from the work of gender experts in peacekeeping
operations. Slovenia joins others in welcoming

resolution 2106 (2013) adopted this morning. Slovenia
also fully aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the European Union.

One of the key priorities of Slovenia in the United
Nations is to address issues of importance to women
around the world. It has been acknowledged many
times that global stability, peace, and prosperity depend
on protecting and advancing the rights of women and
girls. But many times we find ourselves too late in
implementing preventive measures, which may include
efforts to promote the rights of women or other means,
and find ourselves in the midst of armed conflicts,
where particularly vulnerable groups, such as women
and children, are disproportionately impacted.

Needless to say, in such circumstances social
norms get stripped away and sexual attacks all too often
become a weapon of war. Such Violence leaves behind
hundreds of thousands of victims, all of whom are left
traumatized and stigmatized for life. Those hideous
acts affect whole communities and remain vividly
remembered for generations, as seen in the Western
Balkans and Rwanda.

It is therefore of paramount importance to look
beyond prevention. The investigation of cases of sexual
violence in conflict and the holding of perpetrators
of sexual violence in armed conflict accountable are
also of great importance. Ending impunity is pivotal
in addressing sexual violence in conflict. Only that
can serve as a strong deterrent for such actions. In
that regard, we would like to commend the work of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, as well as Justice Rapid Response,
an intergovernmental standby facility of active-duty
criminal justice and related professionals.

The International Criminal Court is the only
international tribunal whose statute explicitly refers
to sexual and gender violence as crimes against
humanity. The use of the Court in such cases should be
an important aspect of establishing peace and security
and the rule of law, whereby special attention should
be given to the principle of complementarity and to the
issue of closing the legal gaps regarding accountability
for the most serious international crimes. However, the
most important area of focus must remain the victims.

Let us recall that Slovenia, together with
Netherlands and Belgium, presented an initiative aimed
at improving the international framework for mutual
legal assistance and extradition in cases involving the
investigation and prosecution ofthe most serious crimes
of international concern, including sexual and gender
violence as crimes against humanity. As suspects,
evidence, witnesses and assets related to those crimes
are usually not restricted to the territory of any one
State, strengthening mutual legal assistance between
States is indispensable for States, if they are to be truly
effective in the national prosecution and investigation
of those crimes.

Finally, let me inform the Council that these
pertinent issues will also be on the agenda of the
Bled Strategic Forum, a high-level strategic dialogue
among leaders from the private and public sectors to
be held in Slovenia in early September of 2013. A panel
discussion entitled "International criminal justice as a
precondition for a prosperous economic future?" will
be organized, and it will, inter alia, address the issue of
sexual and gender violence, with a particular emphasis
on Violence against women and children. We see the
meeting as an opportunity to continue this important
dialogue and also as a sign of my country's continuous
involvement in matters that promote women's rights.

