Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I thank the delegation
of Germany for organizing today's open debate. Our
special appreciation goes to Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his remarks. We thank Ms. Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the other briefers for
sharing their perspectives on this very important subject.

Nigeria condemns in the strongest terms the
abduction, trafficking and maltreatment of women
and girls by extremist groups, including the heinous
activities of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad region,
particularly in north-eastern Nigeria. The use of women
and girls as sex slaves must also be equally condemned.
In that regard, it is our expectation that this debate will
offer suggestions to address the prevailing challenges
and gaps in acquiring the resources needed to advance
the role of women within the context of the global peace
and security architecture.

It is worthy of note that next year we will mark the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), which was initiated during Namibia's presidency
of the Security Council in 2000. We acknowledge
that by adopting resolution 1325 (2000), the Security
Council provided the leadership necessary to give
impetus to involving women in the peace and security
agenda and laid the foundation for subsequent Security
Council resolutions on this very important issue.

In Africa, the African Union (AU) has been a
useful platform for the advancement of the women and
peace and security agenda by placing emphasis on the
engagement of women and youth in the continent's
development. That is clearly reflected in Agenda 2063 of
the African Union. We are proud to note that 25 African
States have a national action plan on women and peace
and security, which constitutes 31 per cent of countries
with a national action plan globally. In addition, there
are numerous AU and African subregional instruments
that advance the women and peace and security agenda.

At the subregional level, in West Africa, the
Economic Community of West African States, in
collaboration with the United Nations Office for West
Africa, developed an integrated plan of action in
September 2010 for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The plan of action emphasizes the
importance of the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution, mediation and peacebuilding efforts, as
well as the rebuilding of post-conflict societies.

Building on those subregional efforts, in August
2013 Nigeria launched a national action plan to fully
implement the relevant provisions of resolution
1325 (2000). The plan reflects the Government's
commitment to ensuring the security of women and
girls during armed conflicts and to enhancing their
active and direct participation in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. We are also collaborating with our
neighbours Chad, Cameroon, the Niger and Benin,
within the framework of the Multinational Joint Task
Force (MNJTF), to defeat the Boko Haram insurgency,
which is targeting women and girls. Our experience
in the Lake Chad region today is evidence that, with
determined international collaboration, terrorism can
be defeated. We therefore call on the international
community to continue to support the MNJTF.

In addition, the Government of Nigeria has
taken steps to cater to victims of Boko Haram
terrorism - in the form of rape and other sexual
violence against children, the abduction of children and
other grave violations - by putting in motion several
remedies. Some legal and social remedies undertaken
by the Government include the diligent prosecution of
detained Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts
of law, as well as reintegration, reorientation and
rehabilitation programmes designed to meet the needs
of each victim of sexual violence.

The sustained efforts of Nigeria and its international
partners have culminated in the liberation of territories
previously occupied by Boko Haram. We have taken
concrete steps to meet the humanitarian needs of
internally displaced persons and to ensure that the
necessary conditions are established to enable their
voluntary return to their places of origin in safety and
dignity. As a sequel to the aforementioned efforts, we
recall the release of the abducted Chibok and Dapchi
girls. Our efforts will continue until the remaining ones
are released.

I would like to conclude by acknowledging the
contributions of civil society organizations as partners
in the prevention, management and resolution of
disputes. The Nigerian Government will continue to
engage them as key stakeholders and partners in the
women and peace and security agenda. Nigeria remains
firmly committed to the promotion and protection of the
rights of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations. In that regard, we will work assiduously
to enhance the participation of women in peace and
security initiatives.

