Ms. Diop: The Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, could
not be with us today, but she congratulates Spain for
its leadership on the women and peace and security
agenda. She wishes the Council a successful high-level
debate.

When resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, the
African Union (AU) took this historic resolution as its
own. Indeed, the Maputo Protocol stipulates in article
2 that all

"State Parties shall combat all forms of
discrimination against women through appropriate
legislative, institutional and other measures."

The Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa
requested the Heads of State and Government of Africa
to meet to "ensure the full and effective participation
and representation of women in peace process", as
stipulated in resolution 1325 (2000). It also calls for the
appointment of women as special envoys and special
representatives of the African Union.

Africa has indeed taken action with respect to the
requirements of resolution 1325 (2000). Starting with
the leadership of the institution, the African Union
Commission, out of the 10 members of the Executive
of the Commission, five are women. The Chairperson,
Ms. Zuma, has continued to strengthen the participation
of women by recently appointing women as Secretary-
General of the Commission, Chief of Staff and
Deputy Chief of Staff. Three more women have been
appointed as Head and Deputy Head of Commission
representation.

The African Union Peace and Security Department

has put in place a gender, peace and security programme
to assist member States and the regional economic
communities in their women and peace and security
agenda. We thank the partners - the United Kingdom,
Sweden, Austria and Norway - that are supporting
that programme. The African Union has embarked
upon capacity-building by increasing the numbers
through the training of women peace mediators, women
election observers and gender advisers to be deployed
in mediation processes and election observation.

The African Union has taken a strong stand on the
issue of sexual abuse and exploitation. The Chairperson
has clearly stated a zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. In Somalia, the AU responded
with the deployment of an investigation and assessment
team following allegations against the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the development of strong
policy. The AU has deployed female peacekeepers and
female police officers in peace support operations.
Right now, African women in the military are fighting
to defeat Al-Shabaab. In South Sudan, a commission
of inquiry was mandated by member States, and
gender-based violence was one of the focus areas to
be investigated. Parties to the conflict have officially
received the report, and now it has been agreed to
establish a hybrid court to bring justice to the South
Sudanese.

The African Union Commission - and here I
would like to congratulate and applaud the efforts by
UN-Women and its Executive Director, Ms. Mlambo-
Ngcuka, my sister - hosted a regional consultation
so that African women could contribute to the global
study. The global study has revealed that Africa has the
highest number of women in political decision-making
bodies and was the first region to appoint a Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security. Indeed, countries
such as Rwanda, Seychelles, Namibia, South Africa and
Senegal are among the world champions when it comes
to women's representation in Parliaments.

It remains clear that the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is slow, even though when we
look at the regional economic communities we see that
many of them have adopted a regional action plan. To
date, 16 countries in Africa have developed a national
action plan. Moreover, there is no systematic reporting
on what the countries have achieved. We salute the
effort of the global study, which has helped to review
the achievements made by Africa's member States.

It is in that regard, as the Special Envoy, that I was
given a mandate to ensure that the voices of women
and the vulnerable were heard much more clearly in
peacebuilding and conflict resolution. In my capacity
as Special Envoy, I visited various countries with the
Executive Director of UN-Women. We both went to
the Central African Republic. With the support of our
partners, we went to South Sudan, Somalia and Nigeria.
I can say that women from different religious and
ethnic groups and political parties are making peace
in their communities. They need more of our support.
In northern Nigeria, the Chibok girls who escaped
have said that they want to continue their studies. They
want to continue receiving support to complete their
schooling.

Africa has decided to place women at the centre
of Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. The 53 member
States have declared 2015 the Year of Women's
Empowerment, and 2016 the Year of Women's Human
Rights. There is no doubt that the women's agenda is
absolutely necessary to achieving peace and prosperity.
We want to see more action in Africa. We need to see
more accountability. We will achieve that through
partnership with civil society organizations and
women's groups.

In December 2014, we held a hearing with the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union with
women from Somalia, South Sudan and the Great
Lakes region. At the end of the meeting, the Peace and
Security Council mandated the Office of the Special
Envoy to work on the continental framework to monitor
the implementation by AU member States and other
relevant stakeholders of the various instruments and
other commitments. Again I thank UN-Women for
supporting this process and my Office in the AU, and
for ensuring that we have such a framework. I also
express my appreciation to the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa for its support of the women and
peace and security agenda in Africa.

I would like to echo the voices ofthe African women
in the field - the women who cannot wait, and to whom
we need to listen. They say: no more declarations; only
solemn action and solemn deliverables.

