The President: I should now like to make a
statement in my national capacity.

I should indicate from the outset that Romania
fully aligns itself with the statement that was made this
morning by the British Ambassador on behalf of the
European Union.

Within the United Nations system and elsewhere,
there is growing international consensus that women's
participation in conflict prevention and peace processes
is a matter of having a solid understanding of and
healthy perspective on the issue. We are told and we
say that the role of women in decision-making is
important and legitimate, serves the cause of peace,
and fosters reconstruction and reconciliation. It is
generally argued that women's empowerment would
ensure that those who are frequently the most
vulnerable play a role in the transformation and
rebuilding of their societies.

That is an assumption that needs challenging.
Women should be acknowledged as having a valuable
contribution to make to their societies and to
international relations not because of their high
potential as victims, but because they are recognized as
valuable and skilful resources, able to make a
difference and bring added value to peace processes in
all parts of the world.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) marked,
in our view, our acceptance and endorsement of a
different mindset about women in peace and security.
We often predetermine policies and decisions,
categorizing women as vulnerable beings and
identifying them primarily as likely victims. Resolution
1325 (2000), however, recognizes the true dimension
of women's capabilities to contribute to and to be equal
partners with men in peace processes and to contribute
substantially to the development of their societies.

We have vivid illustrations of those facts. Women
fight wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, contribute to post-
conflict reconstruction in Kosovo and Bosnia, are
excellent peacekeepers in Africa, act as devoted
parliamentarians, and make decisions in governmental
structures in Rwanda, Uganda and Eritrea.

From the adoption of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) onwards, this Council - and the entire
United Nations system, we should like to believe -
have acted towards and given support to a wider and
more balanced presence of women in peace and
security. The participation of women in conflict
prevention and resolution is no longer narrowly
defined as a matter of gender equality and no longer
confined to a perspective of human rights, democratic
practices or social justice. It is a matter of a whole new
mentality acknowledging that women embody political
representation at all levels and in all societies and have
the necessary knowledge, expertise and resources to
participate in the advancement of their societies
through their active contributions to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes.

At this point, we wish to stress our View that the
role of women as agents of development and peace
should transcend boundaries and cultures. Engaging
women in national and international affairs does not
mean changing one's particular system of values. It is
within the richness of each particular system that
gender perspectives should be sought, put in the
spotlight and mainstreamed into politics and policies.
States, the United Nations, regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations must work together in
order to close the gap that still exists between
discourse and the diplomatic perspective, on the one
hand, and the reality on the ground, on the other.

A starting point in that direction is the recent
report of the Secretary-General on women, peace and
security, particularly the system-wide action plan for
the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). We express our appreciation to the
Secretariat for such a unique and complex work, which
we believe is a useful tool and framework of action for
gender mainstreaming in all activities being carried out
by the United Nations system.

The continued implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) calls for ongoing scrutiny at the national and
international levels of all forms of violence against and
abuse of women in conflict or post-conflict situations
by combatants or United Nations peacekeeping
personnel, as well as of trafficking in human beings,
women refugees and internally displaced persons.

In Romania, with the valuable help and support
of the United Nations Population Fund, this October
organized an international conference on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). The conference in Bucharest brought together
participants from Sierra Leone, Afghanistan, Zambia,
Palestine, Timor-Leste, Thailand, the Sudan and
Kosovo. They discussed the value of the resolution and
how to move forward, share experiences and
methodologies for its implementation and, most
important, how to narrow the gap between the text's
provisions and reality on the ground.

It is indeed true that, even when women are
guaranteed their civil and political rights by a network
of institutions and norms, legal stipulations, even when
just and unambiguous, cannot by themselves ensure
gender equity in the diversity of social and political
life. Empowering women is about overcoming
prejudice and marginalization and marshalling political
will to recognize them as resourceful contributors to
decision-making. It is Romania's position that we
should all shift our approach to women and peace and
security to one that views their participation as the rule
rather than the exception. We should also move from
words to action and, last but not least, treat women as
full partners rather than as a special category.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Ms. Elsie-Bernadette
Onubogu, Gender Adviser of the Commonwealth
Secretariat.

