Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to apologize for asking for the floor again. We
thought that it would be inappropriate and
counterproductive to pass over the comments made by
the representative of Armenia and his attempt to
mislead the Security Council in silence.

It seems that that Member State was the only one
among today's speakers that overtly tried to justify, in
the course of our deliberations, acts of systematic and
widespread violence committed against civilians,
including women and girls. I am confident that a
careful reading of the relevant international documents

would convince the representative of Armenia next
time to refrain from taking the floor and making
irrelevant comments.

The arguments of the Armenian side are
particularly astonishing as they are made in the
Security Council, which, in 1993, adopted a series of
four resolutions condemning the use of force against
Azerbaijan and the occupation of its territories and
demanding the immediate, full and unconditional
withdrawal of Armenian occupying forces from all
occupied territories of Azerbaijan (resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993)).

Another aspect of the problem that the
representative of Armenia prefers not to mention at all
is the determination of the Security Council with
respect to the impact of Armenia's aggression on the
civilian population.

Lastly, the aforementioned resolutions made
specific reference to violations of international
humanitarian law, attacks on civilians and
bombardments of inhabited areas. It is beyond dispute
that such acts, together with violence against women
and girls, amount to war crimes, crimes against
humanity and racial discrimination. It is also
indisputable that, as an occupying Power, Armenia
bears direct responsibility for the commission of those
offences.

Accordingly, what the Armenian representative
attempted to describe in his statement has been
unequivocally qualified by the Security Council, the
General Assembly and other international organizations
as the illegal use of force and the commitment of other
crimes of serious concern to the international
community.

