Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia is grateful to
the Nigerian presidency for convening this important
meeting on an issue that Croatia considers very
significant.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, and I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.

We strongly advocate further support for the
agenda on women and peace and security at all levels,
national, regional and global, and today's debate is a
good and valuable step in that direction. As indicated
in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2014/181),
sexual violence in conflict is one of the greatest and
most persistent injustices in the world today. It is also
one of the most neglected.

Viewed in the broader context, sexual violence
is one of the symptoms of a distorted social order
characterized by conflict, injustice and insecurity.
Sexual violence adds to ethnic and other divisions,
reinforcing insecurity and instability, and leaves
its victims with terrible physical and psychological
wounds, pain and humiliation. There is no doubt
whatever that the use of rape and sexual violence
exacerbates conflicts and perpetuates them long after
active hostilities are over. Crimes of sexual violence
in conflict inflict lasting scars on individuals, families
and societies, making reconciliation and peacebuilding
much more difficult. Peace and reconciliation require a
firm and consistent process and a lot of determination
and patience in order to ascertain the truth, something
that is particularly difficult when rape is used as a tool
of war against women, children and men.

Sexual violence has been used in all recent wars
and conflicts to pursue political and military aims,
including in the former Yugoslavia in the 19905. It
has been used to dominate, to terrify and humiliate
opponents, to uproot communities and ethnic groups,
and thus to contribute to the collapse of entire societies
for generations to come. Based on our own tragic
experiences of the aggression to which Croatia was
exposed at the beginning of the '90s, in which rape
was also used as a method of intimidation and terror,
we are convinced that the issue of sexual violence in
conflict can be adequately addressed only through a
comprehensive approach. The Croatian Government
has therefore proposed a new law for the protection
of victims of sexual violence in war, with the aim
of legislating the rights of such victims, together
with an accompanying system of compensation and
rehabilitation.

Through the extensive experience of war and post-
conflict management that Croatia unfortunately gained
on its own territory, we may be able to make a significant
contribution to wider global efforts to prevent and
combat sexual violence in war and conflict. In that
regard, I am pleased to announce that an International
Conference on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict will
be held in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia, from 29 to
30 May, jointly organized by the Croatian Ministry of
Veterans' Affairs and the United Nations Development
Programme. The Conference will be titled "Delivering
Justice for the Past, Preventing Abuse in the Future",
with its main purpose that of sharing lessons learned
in addressing the rights of victims of sexual violence in
Croatia and other countries of the former Yugoslavia,
and of disseminating those lessons around the world
through the United Nations and other systems. The
Conference can also be seen as a building block for the
upcoming Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, to be held in London.

Croatia is of the opinion that more can and must be
done to combat the issue of sexual violence in conflict,
and particularly to address the prevailing culture of
impunity for such crimes. The non-reporting of sexual
violence in war and conflict is another key problem,
since it affects not only social perceptions of what is
in fact a widespread problem, but also the work of all
the relevant bodies and institutions. We fully recognize
the importance of breaking the silence surrounding
sexual violence in conflicts and changing the public
consciousness so that the shame and embarrassment
become that of the perpetrator. Civil society
organizations can play a very important and vital role
in that regard.

A book entitled Suncica - which means "sunny"
in English ~published in Croatia in 2011, contains the
testimonies of imprisoned women against whom the
crime ofrape was committed during the war in Croatia.
Sunny has also become a strong civil movement in
Croatia during recent years, with courageous women
finally breaking the social and intimacy barriers that
occur in cases of war-time rape. Based on the book,
the movie Sunny was filmed, with the support of the
Croatian Ministry for Veterans Affairs, and was recently
premiered in Zagreb. It is the first documentary film in
which the victims of sexual violence in war, including
male victims, have come out to speak of their suffering.

At the global level, there is now increased
awareness on the part of the international community
about the problem of wartime sexual violence. We have
to build on that positive momentum and take concrete
action to address impunity and strengthen specific
goals - comprehensive reform oflegislation on wartime
sexual violence and reparation for victims, speeding
up the processing of war crimes, implementing the
witness-protection programme, changing the societal
mentality, and severe punishment for perpetrators, not
victims.

Finally, we believe that the Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
provides a solid framework to step up our efforts in
preventing and responding to sexual violence and
bringing about justice for millions of victims of sexual
violence, not only in conflict but also in post-conflict
situations and beyond.

As a member of the group of global champions
of the Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative, Croatia
will spare no effort to take a more prominent role in
preventing and combating sexual violence in war and
conflict and to continue to give its firm support to all
areas of the women and peace and security agenda.

