Ms. Soderberg (United States): The United
States warmly welcomes this open debate on women
and peace and security. We pay a special tribute to
Secretary-General Annan for his remarks and fully
concur with his report statement:

"Equality of rights, opportunities and access to
resources between men and women are
fundamental requirements" (A/52/87]/, para. 89)

in building a durable peace.

I want to join Ambassador Durrant in paying a
special tribute to you, Mr. President, and to
Ambassador Andjaba, for your leadership in bringing
about this important meeting. I also want to pay a
special warm welcome to Ms. Angela King, Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, and to Ms. Heyzer, Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women. This
invitation this morning is long overdue and I hope that
this body will meet the challenge that you have put to
us today. It is an historic challenge that you put before
us. We warmly welcome that.

I also want to pay a special welcome to our guests
in the gallery. I think your participation and support are
very important and I think this is the first time I have
ever heard applause in this Chamber. So you are
enlivening it.

Today's meeting must not only make us more
aware of the important role women play in preventing
conflict, encouraging reconciliation and helping to
rebuild conflict-ridden societies, but it also must spur
us to concrete action. We, in the international
community, have failed to make maximum use of the
contributions of women in our efforts to promote peace
and security throughout the world. As Secretary of
State Albright pointed out in a recent speech to a group
of businesswomen, "in too many places, women remain
an undervalued and underdeveloped human resource."

We applaud the unwavering efforts of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies to confront
problems that mostly affect women. The work of these
bodies and the international community's moral and
financial support for such efforts has changed the lives
of many, both young and old. Working together, we
have taken steps to promote equality of opportunity,
educate women and girls, change the unbalanced
inheritance and divorce laws, advance political and
economic rights and eradicate traditional practices
harmful to women and girls.

Much of our attention has been directed toward
protecting women, especially from the devastating
effects of armed conflict, including forced
displacement, trafficking of women, torture, rape and
other acts of sexual violence, as well as a host of other
crimes. For example, the 1993 World Conference on
Human Rights focused on women solely as victims of
armed conflict. While the issue of protection of women
cannot be ignored, I hope that Security Council action
will emphasize the leadership role women can and
should play in restoring peace.

Women are an under-utilized positive force for
peace. The Fourth World Conference on Women
recognized that they must be fully involved in
preventing and resolving conflicts. We must actively
promote formal mechanisms, which support a
consistent female presence at the peace table, in
peacekeeping operations and in the peace building
efforts to reconstruct institutions vital to lasting
stability.

The Secretary-General, by appointing qualified
women to visible positions of influence, has set a
laudable example for us all to follow. Deputy
Secretary-General Louise Frechette, High
Commissioners Mary Robinson and Sadako Ogata, the
United Nations Children's Fund's Carol Bellamy and
the World Food Programme's Catherine Bertini, to
name just a few, demonstrate daily that women do
make a difference in defusing conflicts and promoting
equality, peace and security. The challenge before us is
to emulate their achievements in other international
and regional organizations, in national Governments
and across all levels of society. The United States
applauds the appointment of these women, but we want
to see more done.

In particular, we need more women as Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, as special
envoys and as human rights investigators and monitors.
We hope the Secretary-General will strive to appoint
more, fully qualified women to these positions, as well
as those within his own Secretariat. We strongly
encourage Member States to bring such candidates to
his attention and to support the idea of the United
Nations maintaining a roster of qualified women
maintained as part of the United Nations Standby
Arrangements System.

We need more than influential women at the
highest levels of power and prestige. The United
Nations must ensure that women's voices are heard
wherever the United Nations assists in the settlement of
conflicts and in post-conflict peace-building. With all
due respect to my colleagues, just look around this
room. A good place to start would be for Member
States to appoint more women as ambassadors to the
United Nations. Certainly one woman Permanent
Representative, the distinguished Patricia Durrant, out
of 15 on the Security Council, is at least 6 or 7 too few.
Ten women out of 189 Permanent Representatives is a
sad commentary on the state of women in leadership
positions of Member States. If we are to heed President
Theo-Ben Gurirab's challenge that we all just heard in
the video to make women half of every solution,
Member States must be able to do better than five per
cent.

In all phases of peacekeeping and peace-building
missions the presence of women must be visible and
consistent. When possible, fact-finding missions should
include gender advisors and the terms of reconciliation
and reconstruction should draw on the expertise of
women's community groups. The immediate aftermath
of a conflict provides a unique window of opportunity
to rebuild, with the equal participation of women, the
public security institutions vital to lasting stability. In
order to facilitate this, States should be committed to
gender balance in their contributions to civilian police
and other peacekeeping contingents and to assisting
other States in achieving a gender-balanced
perspective.

In place after place, from Northern Ireland to
Guatemala to South Africa, we see that women are
most effective when they are able to organize and be
heard. Our First Lady's involvement in the organization
Vital Voices has demonstrated around the world this
fact time and again. We, as members of the Security
Council, cannot be content with token representation of
half of the world's population. The Security Council
should consider establishing a very specifically
mandated expert panel or working group to report on
mechanisms that will ensure equal representation of
women in peacekeeping and peace-building operations.

We also need to prepare our United Nations
peacekeepers for encounters with the entire population
in a mission area. This means that peacekeepers-
military, civilian and civil servants - should be trained
in gender issues; and it means that they who violate
women's most basic rights must be brought to justice.
The training should focus on codes of conduct and
cultural and societal norms with respect to women, and
on the study of the Convention on the Elimination of
all Forms of Discrimination Against Women.

At managerial levels training should include the
participation of women in institution-building,
particularly in rule-of-law areas. The Training Unit of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should
develop exportable modules that may be used in
national and regional programmes, and all United
Nations training programmes must include elements on
gender issues.

We encourage States to assist in other meaningful
ways as well. The United States, for example, has
provided funding to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to support the
Bosnian Women's Initiative, which promotes the
reintegration of women into the economy. It
emphasizes training, legal assistance and support for
micro-enterprise projects. Likewise, the United States
has supported the Rwanda Women's Initiative to
address refugee women's reintegration. The
Department of State has also provided support for the
Women's Commission for Refugee Women and
Children, which operates in Sierra Leone, Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan and the Sudan. Those programmes not only
provide services to women in war-torn areas, but they
also seek to integrate them into the political and
economic lives of their countries.

As we move forward we should take care that our
efforts to further empower women in no way
disadvantage men. We should strive for equality, not
special treatment. What we really need is a
commitment from Member States of the United
Nations, the Secretariat and all concerned to honour the
obligations and promises already made to women. We
should now look ahead to concrete initiatives in
support of those promises.

In closing, let me again commend you and your
delegation, Mr. President, for calling this important
meeting today. I hope this meeting will be the
beginning of regular discussions in this Chamber, and
that one day there will be equal gender representation
around this table and throughout these halls.

