Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Sir, for having convened this open debate.
At the same time, I would like to reiterate the position
of Ecuador that the Security Council, in recognition
of the value of keeping the discussion of the serious
topic before us today alive, must constrain its actions in
keeping with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations in this as in all contexts - that is to say, with
respect to matters posing a threat international peace
and security.

The Ecuadorian Constitution defines our country
as a territory of peace. Likewise, as a member of the
Union of South American Nations, we have set out to
build a region of peace where the peaceful resolution
of disputes is promoted. We believe that this approach
is fundamental to avoiding conflict. We understand
that peace is not simply the absence of war, but that it
requires us to work to eradicate poverty and inequality
at the national and international levels. We must
recognize that armed conflicts often arise in contexts
of inequality between States resulting from an unjust
international economic system and various forms of
social exclusion and ethnic, religious and gender-based
intolerance, which are determining factors at the root of
armed conflicts and acts of violence. We must therefore
call on States to avoid wars of aggression and the use
of force against supposed threats and to respect the
sovereignty and self-determination of peoples.

The current situation of conflicts around the
world is extremely worrying. In this scenario, where
the inequalities among States manifest themselves
in asymmetric struggles in which those who control
resources impose their force and will, the environment
ofconflict is influencing economic dynamics. Countries
in crisis resort to the arms trade to strengthen their real
economies. This leads us to wonder what has happened
to the sense of global ethics. Nothing harms human
rights more than fueling the economy with weapons.

Global military spending in 2012 totaled
$1.753 trillion, which is more than 2.5 per cent of global
gross domestic product. The five countries with the
highest military expenditure together represent more
than four-fifths of total global military expenditure.

As we address the problem of sexual violence in
conflict against this backdrop, it must be borne in mind
that there exist social conventions whereby violence
against women is permitted and has, unfortunately,
come to seem normal and commonplace. Rapes
committed during conflict are intended to terrorize,
break families and communities apart, and transmit
infections, and, at times, change the ethnic composition
of populations. However, beyond the motivations for the
use of such acts as weapons of war, they also contribute
to the possession and control of women as pawns of
war.

Sexual violence is a violation of fundamental human
rights, and of the human rights and dignity of women
in particular. Efforts to use international humanitarian
law and international criminal law to protect women
from sexual violence must be redoubled.

All States are responsible not only for ending such
violence but also for ending impunity for war crimes,
including those related to sexual violence. In Ecuador,
the Constitution recognizes the right of people to live
free from all forms of violence. Our Constitution also
designates the armed forces as an institution to protect
the rights, freedoms and guarantees of citizens, and that
members of the armed forces may be judged only by the
legal system, which is why the Military Justice Court
was abolished in 2008. This reflects the determination
of the State to ensure the impartiality of judges and to
prevent impunity.

In keeping with these constitutional foundations,
reforms to the penal code were introduced in 2010, and
a chapter was included on crimes against people and
goods protected by international humanitarian law,
incorporating the crimes covered by the Rome Statute
and providing for the severe punishment with extended
prison sentences of 16 to 25 years for any military
personnel who commit acts of a sexual or reproductive
nature, including rape, against protected persons during

an armed conflict.

It is crucial to bear in mind that the participation of
women on an equal footing with men is indispensible for
achieving peace. The State of Ecuador has incorporated
the gender perspective into its National Plan for Good
Living, but also has a national plan for the eradication
of gender-based violence, which was established as
State policy in 2007. The Ministry of National Defence
promotes the concept of defence as a public good, and a
gender approach is therefore incorporated into defence
policy. Human rights are seen as an area for action in
policy implementation, including through the promotion
of policies of gender equality, coexistence and respect
for cultural identity and the effective implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1889 (2009).

In March this year, we established the Ecuadorian
Armed Forces Gender Policy, based on the principles
of equality and non-discrimination, especially
non-discrimination against women. The Policy
emphasizes the strategic political importance of the
participation of women in the military sphere, with equal
rights and opportunities. The Gender Policy promotes
change in the cultural patterns that lead to gender-based
violence, is incorporated into the education of military
personnel, and promotes educational programmes on
preventing sexual violence, in particular in training
troops.

To measure the impact of the Gender Policy with
indicators, the Ministry of Defence has a computerized
system for monitoring human rights, gender equality
and intercultural matters. This system allows us to
link cases of suspected human rights violations and
gender-based violence, serving as a useful tool for
building respect for human rights and gender equality
in the armed forces and for eradicating violence
against individuals, communities, ethnic groups and
nationalities.

We believe that if each State establishes a national
framework, international ones will be strengthened.
No one should be beyond the reach of national or
international justice in cases of gender violence,
particularly sexual violence in situations of conflict.
Hence Ecuador, as a State party, supports the
International Criminal Court and calls on those States
that have not yet done so, particularly those involved in
conflict of any sort, to accede to the Rome Statute.

Finally, Ecuador stresses that combating impunity
is vital in order to deal with the issue of sexual violence
in conflict. But even more important is to address
the causes of conflict, that is, the arms economy and
violence committed by the powerful. Our commitment
is to build a true culture of peace and new ways of
coexistence.
