Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today's debate.

In the past, even as a non-Council member, Italy
has stressed the need for the Security Council to be
engaged in human trafficking and the related serious
violations of human rights, and to that end, two years
ago, promoted resolution 2240 (2015), on countering the
business model of traffickers off the coast of Libya in
the Mediterranean. As a Council member, we support
treating the issue as a priority.

Italy aligns it itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union (EU). In my national
capacity, I would like to add the following remarks.
First, it is essential, we believe, to follow up on
resolution 2331 (2016), which was introduced by Spain.
Its adoption represented a big step forward, in particular
by highlighting the links between transnational
organized crime, terrorism and trafficking networks.
Transnational organized crime and terrorist groups
make use of human trafficking as a weapon to control
territories and as a major source of funding. We
therefore strongly support the Secretary-General in
following up on resolution 2331 (2016) by systematizing
the action of subsidiary organs involved in counter-
terrorism and sanctions, specialized agencies and the
Special Rapporteur entrusted with preparing a detailed
study on the difficulties of establishing guilt and/or
responsibilities with regard to crimes of sexual violence
and the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially in women and children. Italy looks forward
to the Secretary-General's report on resolution 2331
(2016), to be submitted at the end of the year, which we
believe will further enhance the United Nations and the
Council's capacity to address that growing threat.

Secondly, human trafficking requires a comprehensive
approach at the national and international levels. At
the international level, we need a concerted response
grounded on the implementation of international rules
and encompassing the aspects of prevention, law
enforcement and accountability. In that respect, Italy
looks forward to the high-level debate on the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, also known as the Palermo Convention, to be
held in the General Assembly in June. At the same time,
national jurisdictions bear the primary responsibility to
criminalize such offenses and ensure the accountability
of the criminals. We stress the importance that all
States ratify, fully transpose and implement the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children at the national level as they provide the main
internationally agreed legal framework to prevent and
combat human trafficking. In that regard, we praise the
UNODC-EU initiative, the Global Action to Prevent
and Address Trafficking in Persons and Smuggling
of Migrants, to assist the development of national
comprehensive strategies to counter trafficking.

Thirdly, the available statistics urgently indicate
that we must take more victim-centred, gender-specific
and children-sensitive actions. Women account for
more than half of all victims of trafficking at the global
level. Children are especially exposed to exploitation
as they are increasingly compelled to leave their
homes alone. In 2016 alone, approximately 26,000
unaccompanied or separated minors reached Italy by
sea, thereby more than doubling the numbers recorded
in 2015. Empowering women and enhancing their role in
peacebuilding is crucial. We are launching the creation
of a network of women mediators in the Mediterranean
aimed at fostering stability, security and respect for
human rights in the Mediterranean, which we think
will contribute to combating human trafficking and all
forms of slavery and related abuses. As a first step, we
are organizing with the United Kingdom presidency an
Arria formula meeting on the subject on 27 March.

F ourthly, we think that legal and safe ways to ensure
the movement of people fleeing from conflicts serve an
important instrument in the fight against trafficking.
The Italian Government is carrying out a project
called "humanitarian corridors", which allows safe and
legal entry into Italy to people fleeing from conflict,
especially in Syria. It is an act of solidarity and a model
that other States, such as France, are following. It is
also a means to combat trafficking and the exploitation
of the trafficked. In the same spirit, we also welcome
the call on the part of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to end statelessness,
including through the enhancement and digitalization
ofa civil registry in the countries of origin, because the
lack of documents is one of the main factors that can
induce modern slavery.

Large movements of people can facilitate human
trafficking and modern enslavement. Being a migrant
is itself a vulnerability that can favour the exploitation
of people on the move. Let me, in conclusion, reiterate
the pillars of Italy's approach: sharing responsibilities
and raising awareness at the regional and global levels;
saving lives at sea; addressing the socioeconomic and
political root causes of conflict; disrupting the business
model of traffickers and smugglers; and upholding
the rights of migrants and refugees and international
humanitarian law.

