Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Let me convey our appreciation to Secretary
of State Rice who, earlier, personally presided over this
meeting. Let me also thank you, Mr. President, for your
proposal to hold this open debate on such an important
issue.

Libya is concerned at reports of sexual violence
against women and girls in many conflict areas. We are
even more concerned at the use of sexual violence
against women as an instrument of war in some
conflict situations. I do not believe that anyone would
argue that such acts are not a heinous crime whose
perpetrators must be brought to justice and must not
enjoy impunity.

Resolution 1325 (2000) took up the issue, and in
its paragraph 10 it called on all parties to armed
conflict "to take special measures to protect women
and girls from gender-based violence, particularly rape
and other forms of sexual abuse". In its paragraph 11,
the resolution emphasized

"the responsibility of all States to put an end to
impunity and to prosecute those responsible for
genocide, crimes against humanity, and war
crimes including those relating to sexual and
other violence against women and girls".

It is regrettable, indeed it is a stigma for mankind,
that these crimes continue to be perpetrated on a daily
basis. For example, it is reported that more than 880
rapes were committed in April alone in North Kivu in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Some estimate
that that number reflects no more than 10 per cent of
the true figure.

We note that heinous crimes of sexual violence
against women in armed conflict, are perpetrated by
three categories of people - armed forces personnel of
States involved in conflict; personnel of the
United Nations peacekeeping forces; and non-State
actors that are parties to a conflict.

Due to the varying nature of the perpetrators of
these crimes, it is natural that our approach to the
problem should be adapted to the perpetrator. We
believe that greater awareness of international
humanitarian law through education in military
institutions could help to alleviate the problem.
However, this alone is not sufficient, as law is
generally taught only to officers and not to ordinary
soldiers, who are responsible for most of these crimes.
Furthermore, some soldiers, even when aware of the
relevant international law and because of the difficult
circumstances of a conflict, do not in general pay much
heed to the consequences of their acts. Therefore,
Member States, with the assistance of the United
Nations, must seek other means to deal with the
problem and to raise the awareness of soldiers about
the gravity of sexual violence against women and its
moral abhorrence.

In this regard, we believe that in many societies
religion has more effect than law. We do not believe
that there is a single religion on Earth that lacks moral

norms dealing with relations between soldiers and
non-combatants in situations of war. Let me stress that
Islam, for example, has deterrent moral norms related
to the behaviour of combatants and their treatment of
civilians. Those norms prevent and prohibit all crimes
against civilians, including sexual crimes against
women and girls.

We therefore propose that the Security Council
urge all Member States to concentrate more on the
moral and religious aspects of the training of military
personnel, including peacekeeping forces. We also
suggest the preparation of booklets setting out moral
and religious norms related to the treatment of civilians
in time of war, in addition to the norms of international
humanitarian law. These could be distributed to
soldiers in peacekeeping operations. Moreover, we
believe that appropriate mechanisms must be created to
address complaints by civilian victims of abuse by
soldiers, including sexual violence against girls and
women. This would also serve to deter such crimes.

Let me recall that all member States bear the
responsibility to enact effective legislation against
impunity, to conduct education and media campaigns
enhancing awareness on women's rights and training
programmes to help eliminate cultural prejudice
against women.

We believe that the Security Council can play a
vital role in taking the measures necessary to protect
women and girls from sexual violence in conflict
situations. It can also urge States to prosecute the
perpetrators of such crimes, particularly because
impunity can put at risk hard-earned national
reconciliation and peace.

In conclusion, let me stress that the complete
solution to sexual violence against women and girls in
conflict situations lies in resolving conflict, attaining
peace, creating an accountable, transparent and
effective security sector, encouraging development in
post-conflict countries and promoting women's
participation in many fields.

Through its specialized agencies, the United
Nations can contribute by supporting national efforts to
advance women and by funding training and education
programmes for women and children, in particular in
rural areas.
21
Finally, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
having submitted the draft resolution before us, which
we support.

