Ms. Lemos-Maniati: It is a great pleasure for me
to be here today and to represent NATO in this
important debate.

NATO's approach towards the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is firmly anchored within the
framework of building and maintaining sustainable
peace and security. With more than 100,000 men and
women currently engaged in operations, from
Afghanistan to the Western Balkans, NATO has made
clear that the involvement of women in operations is
crucial if we want to establish relationships and trust
with civil society.

The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
which was celebrated last year, provided a catalyst for
further initiatives and an impetus for continued high-
level engagement. For NATO, that was highlighted at
the Lisbon Summit of November 2010, when the Allied
heads of State and Government renewed their political
commitment to resolution 1325 (2000). At the same
time, they endorsed both a comprehensive report on the
implementation of Alliance policy and a NATO action
plan on mainstreaming resolution 1325 (2000) into
NATO-led operations and missions. Both documents
have guided our work in 2011, setting out a number of
concrete goals, such as improving the gender balance
at the senior level in NATO-led operations and
missions and encouraging nations to include the gender
perspective in their national training initiatives, to be
achieved by clearly defined deadlines. In our efforts to
mainstream resolution 1325 (2000) in NATO-led
operations and missions, we have also added an initial
set of indicators, making further progress more easily
measurable.

On the ground, our efforts have led to the
creation and filling of gender-related positions in our
operations, from Afghanistan to the Western Balkans.
Since 2009, when the first military gender adviser was
deployed to the International Security Assistance Force
headquarters in Afghanistan, we have seen a significant
increase in the number of gender-related positions in
NATO-led operations and missions. Even more
important, the gender perspective is increasingly
becoming an integral part of all our operational
planning.

In the fields of education and training, gender
perspective modules have now been included in most
of NATO's predeployment training efforts. That is an
area where we feel that we can benefit from the
experience of other international organizations. We are
therefore pleased to contribute to the United Nations
Development Programme project aimed at supporting
gender mainstreaming in security sector reform in the
Western Balkans. We hope that the programme, and
similar cooperation that we have already begun with
the United Nations, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
will continue and will deepen over the course of the
coming year.

We have also continued to support women's
networks, especially in Afghanistan, which play a key
role in the development of governance and social and
economic development. We are also actively engaged
in training women as part of local forces.

As we look ahead, we know that we need to do
more. We will continue our efforts to mainstream
resolution 1325 (2000) in our operations, to develop
education and training in civilian and military
frameworks, to share experiences, lessons learned and
best practices, and to encourage nations to promote the
participation of women in their armed forces.

In so doing, we strive to continue our work of
making the principles of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions an integral part of the everyday
business ofNATO.

