Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate. I would
also like to thank all the briefers for their statements
and to welcome the participation of non-governmental
organizations in this Council meeting.

Malaysia reiterates the importance it attaches
to general principles on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and in particular to the protection of
women and girls in such situations. As a member of
the Council, Malaysia is keenly aware of the significant
responsibility shouldered in that regard and reiterates
its commitment to continue to contribute to efforts
further implementing such principles.

We continue to note with deep concern that in
many violent crises around the world, non-combatant
women, girls and children comprise the vast majority of
those in desperate need of protection and humanitarian
assistance. Malaysia shares the assessment that women
and girls are particularly vulnerable and face specific
risks in conflict situations. We are deeply disturbed
by the increasing trend of the deliberate targeting of
women and girls by belligerents in violent conflicts.

While great strides have been made in recognizing
the differentiated impact of armed conflict on women
and girls and in the corresponding efforts to respond
to their needs since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), Malaysia is of the view that more could be
done. In that regard, one key aspect that could benefit
from more focused attention relates to the tendency of
policymakers to view women and girls as victims and
to design protection measures based on that perception.
Malaysia holds the View that much more could be done
to recognize the role of women as agents for action.
Such recognition could further empower them to play
an active role in creating a protection environment that
comprehensively addresses their immediate and long-
term needs.

We all agree that the protection of civilians is one
of the most visible and key functions of a significant
number of existing peacekeeping operations. In
that context, Malaysia reaffirms its support for
prioritizing the protection of civilians mandates of
those peacekeeping missions. Given the unique and
disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women
and girls, Malaysia also believes it is relevant to
assess whether current protection of civilians efforts
adequately address their concerns and needs. In that
regard, we note that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has developed a three-tiered approach to the
protection of civilians and believe that such approach
provides a useful way to frame the discussions on the
protection of civilians in general and the protection of
women and girls in particular.

Additionally, we support the Gender Forward
Looking Strategy 2014-2018 and hope that it will be
fully implemented in the context of fulfilling protection
of civilians mandates, including by ensuring that an
appropriate number of gender advisers and women
protection advisers are deployed to peacekeeping
missions where mandated. Malaysia also wishes to
underscore that Blue Helmets mandated to protect
women and girls must be held to the highest standards.
Therefore, we call for the strict implementation of the
zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations personnel.

Peacekeeping mandates have evolved over time to
become more complex and multidimensional. In that
regard, Malaysia shares the View that peacekeepers
and civilian personnel deployed in the field must be
equipped with the necessary skills and knowledge so
that they may navigate complex environments involving
multiple actors fulfilling diverse roles and mandates.
Therefore, it is important that peacekeeping missions
mandated to carry out protection of civilians tasks are
also supported with adequate means to do so, including
through the provision of resources and training for that
purpose. In that connection, Malaysia believes that
standardized training is especially important to ensure
a clear understanding of the general peacekeeping
mandate, including the protection of civilians
component where applicable, and to take into account
gender considerations and sensitivity.

Mindful of the need for such multidimensional
training, the Malaysian Peacekeeping Centre has
and continues to collaborate with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to provide training on
various aspects of peacekeeping for countries in Asia
and beyond. To date, the Centre has provided training
to roughly 2,000 peacekeepers from over 50 countries.
Most recently, the Centre, with the assistance of the
United Nations Development Programme and several
donor Governments, including Japan and Norway,
has embarked on a new training programme to cater
to the complex and multidimensional nature of new
peacekeeping mandates. The current phase of the
project, which runs from March 2014 to December 2015,
involves developing training manuals and modules on
gender, cultural diversity in peacekeeping operations
and the protection of civilians.

Malaysia believes that creating an environment
conducive to the long-term protection of women
and girls is as important as addressing immediate
concerns in conflict situations. In the context of post-
conflict peacebuilding, the establishment of a secure
environment that would allow for development and
growth and for the building of domestic institutions and
capacities must be prioritized. Properly implemented,
such initiatives would contribute positively to
preventing a relapse into conflict.

The active participation of women and girls must
be encouraged so as to ensure that they can contribute
to ensuring that adequate strategies are developed in
post-conflict settings. For example, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes must
be able to address the needs of former women and girl
combatants, who often face stigmatization for their
non-traditional involvement in conflict.

Given that women are often thrust into positions of
responsibility in times of conflict and in post-conflict
scenarios, Malaysia believes that women and girls must
be given the tools and the opportunity to rebuild their
lives through education and economic opportunities.
On a related note, ensuring accountability and justice
for serious violations is also a crucial means of
guaranteeing long-term protection for women and girls.
We believe that tackling impunity through strengthened
justice mechanisms should be made a priority.

We hope that the discussion today provides
valuable perspectives that will be taken into account
in the various review processes that are ongoing this
year, including the global study and high-level review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The intersection of the reviews on peace operations,
peacebuilding and women and peace and security
provides a unique opportunity to ensure that the rights
of women and girls are threaded throughout the efforts
to maintain international peace and security.

