Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to start by conveying its gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for having organized this debate
as well as for the opportunity afforded Belgium to
participate therein.

The fight against sexual violence is a priority for
Belgium. My country wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2016/36l) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict for her untiring commitment to
the cause. My country welcomes also the presence of
the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in human beings
and thanks her for briefing this morning.

My delegation fully supports the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore limit my remarks to a few points of particular
importance for Belgium.

First, Belgium endorses the conclusion of the
Secretary-General that suppression is an essential
element in preventing sexual violence related to
conflict, including by terrorist and violent extremist
groups. The Special Rapporteur also underscores that
when it comes to trafficking in persons in conflict
situations, and she identifies fragile or non-existent
justice systems as a contributing factor to trafficking.
That is a reason that Belgium has made the fight against
impunity a priority. In that regard, my delegation would
like to mention that, on 7 June, along with UN-Women,
it will hold an event on the occasion ofthe publication of
the book entitled Prosecuting Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence." Lessons Learned From the ICTY.

The integration of the gender dimension is another
key element in the fight against sexual violence.
Along with protecting women and girls against sexual
violence, that is one of the main goals of our second
national action plan, covering the period 2013-2016,
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is
against that backdrop that Belgium intends to support
the call of the Secretary-General to give women the
means to participate in efforts to encourage families and
communities to resist the terrorist strategy on sexual
violence. My country also believes that it is imperative
to work with traditional and religious leaders, who can
help to turn back on the perpetrators of sexual violence
the stigmatization with which victims are being
regularly targeted.

Belgium also wishes to point out, as does
the Secretary-General, the importance of clearly
understanding the link between human trafficking
and sexual violence during and after conflict. Current
conflicts are increasingly linked to human trafficking,
especially in women and children, whose vulnerability
is exacerbated by the conflicts themselves. Belgium
is therefore pleased that this link between human
trafficking and conflict was chosen by the Special
Rapporteur as the theme of her latest report, whose
great relevance my delegation would like to highlight.

For its part, Belgium is committed to implement
its new national action plan against human trafficking
for the period 2015-2019, in which the gender
dimension has also been taken into account. As noted
by the Special Rapporteur, the nature and form of
trafficking in conflict situations differ by gender, and
trafficking for sexual exploitation affects women and
girls disproportionately.

Furthermore, Belgium shares the concerns
expressed about the impact of conflict on child
trafficking. Belgium is particularly concerned about
the Secretary-General's observation concerning the
danger posed by the fact that in countries where women
do not have the right to pass on their nationality to their
children, where births are not registered and where
children, particularly those born of rape, find themselves
marginalized, children are even further exposed.

Finally, my delegation would like to conclude by
emphasizing the importance of the recommendation of
the Secretary-General calling on the Security Council
to fully include the issue of sexual violence in conflict
in the work of the sanctions committees and to ensure
that they avail themselves of the advice of experts in the
field. The indisputable legitimacy of sanctions adopted
in this context will greatly enhance our collective
efforts in the fight against this scourge, which Belgium
is committed to continue unabated.

