Miss Thomas (Jamaica): First of all, let me
express my delegation's congratulation to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. I also commend you for
convening this open meeting on conflict, peacekeeping
and gender, an issue which the Security Council and
the international community have recognized as being
as important to the maintenance of international peace
and security as the cessation of cross-border conflicts.

It has been almost two years since the adoption of
Council resolution 1325 (2002) on women, peace and
security, which stressed the importance of bringing a
gender perspective to the centre of all United Nations
peacekeeping, peacemaking, peace-building, rehabilitation
and reconstruction efforts. Most importantly, it
underscored the need for international attention to what is
basically a woman's human rights, as was underscored by
our presentations today. We therefore support the view
that this item should be regularly discussed on the
international agenda and be given prominence in thematic
debates every time a conflict situation is addressed.

Today's meeting serves as timely reminder that
mainstreaming of a gender perspective in peacekeeping
operations is yet to be fulfilled beyond a normative
level and to achieve more operationalized aspects. It is
in this regard that we thank the presenters - Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno; Ms. Angela King, from
the Department of Women's Affairs; and Ms. Noeleen
Heyzer - for their presentations this morning.

As we reflected on the findings of both reports
which were shared with us this morning - the
Secretary-General's study and the assessment report of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), we wanted to offer a few comments and
observations.

First, we concur that the linkage between gender
and peace is pervasive and is a complex issue.
Experiences have all pointed to the fact that women
and girls share similar experience with men and boys
during armed conflict, but that the culture of violence
and discrimination against women and girls that exists
during peace times is exacerbated during conflict. As
was clearly stated this morning, women are
combatants, victims and perpetrators of violence.
Failure to include them in the peacemaking process
will only prolong the conflict.

One of our observations is that there is a narrow
definition of who a soldier is or who a fighter is, which
often functions in ways that discriminate against and
marginalize women and girls involved in the fighting
processes. Nowhere is this more glaring than in the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and rehabilitation (DDR) programmes. This is an issue
that we want to stress. As we have noted and seen from
experience, DDR programmes fail to make basic
accommodations for women and girls. DDR
programmes fall short of the expectation of
rehabilitating women and girls into society. What often
obtains is that the woman returns to a life of poverty, or
even faces stigmatization.

Is there any way - and this is something that we
could throw to the agencies that might be in the room,
as well as to the Security Council - in which the
Security Council, the United Nations and its funds and
programmes could consider practical ways for a DDR
structure to take into account the needs of female ex-
combatants to ensure their rehabilitation into society?
Perhaps we could elaborate whether such programmes
exist.

Violence against women is also a growing
concern, as was mentioned in the presentation this
morning. We commend the positive developments in
international humanitarian law, including the work of
the ad hoc International Criminal Court and the special
court for Sierra Leone, in defining rape and other forms
of sexual violence as war crimes and crimes against
humanity. This augurs well for ending impunity for
violence against women. However, this legal
framework should be complemented at the local level
by a comprehensive framework aimed at improving
existing protection for women and girls.

The reports of gender-based violence and related
security issues in peacekeeping operations also need to
be addressed. I was very pleased to hear the
commitment by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) to address this issue. Therefore,
training peacekeepers in gender awareness and gender
sensitivity before they go to the field, and while they
are in the field, is of paramount importance. The
training should not only be one shot, but continuous.
There is also a need for streamlined codes of conduct
and investigative and disciplinary mechanisms to be
coordinated among the agencies both in the field and at
Headquarters. I invite representatives to comment on
that as well.

We see that domestic violence has become more
widespread and systematic in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We must commend the United Nations
efforts in this area in addressing this in a peacekeeping
environment. We have seen very positive examples in
Kosovo and East Timor.

The question is: how can capacities within the
peacekeeping operations be strengthened to address
this crisis? We could suggest a couple of things:
possibly we need more counsellors on staff in
peacekeeping operations, as well as more training to
deal with domestic violence. We have noted at the
international level that States Parties to the Statute of
the ICC can now undertake national law reform to
ensure compatibility with the Statute as a matter of
priority and support universal jurisdiction, which plays
close attention to crimes against women. This is a
positive step. At the field and institutional levels we
need possibly to implement other tangible things, too.

This leads us into the role of conflict prevention,
peace-building and peacemaking. Women have played
an instrumental role in early warning and conflict
prevention. I need not elaborate on what has been said
previously, but I would encourage that there be
innovative ways of including women in peace talks and
negotiations. One tangible way of doing this is, first, to
have closer collaboration with the non-governmental
organization community and, secondly, the United
Nations should continue its thrust towards
strengthening the capacities of the non-governmental
organizations and women's groups, because, as has
been observed, the expertise exists there.

But do they have the capacity? Do they have the
financing to fulfil their role as women in a very active
way in the peace process? Here I want to commend the
work of UNIFEM. at the field level in capacity-building
and training with non-governmental organizations, and
also the work of the departments of women's affairs at
the governmental level.

Lastly, I address the Security Council in terms of
ensuring that women's concerns are incorporated in the
Council's mandates and into its decision-making. I
believe that there should be a more systematic
mechanism to enable women's participation in Security
Council missions. The missions to conflict areas should
endeavour to meet with gender advisors to gain insight
into the role of women's groups, as well as to ensure
informed decision-making in the formulation of
peacekeeping mandates.

Most importantly, within DPKO, we firmly
believe that there needs to be a greater level of
coordination between Headquarters and the field. This
would facilitate a more coherent policy on gender
mainstreaming and the fact that gender is taken into
account in the design and planning of all peacekeeping
operations. It is against this background that we
support the creation of a senior agenda advisor within
DPKO who will serve as a focal point for giving policy
advice to gender advisors in the field, as well as feed
into the gender policy on gender mainstreaming. We
are happy to hear that there are plans to have an agenda
advisor in the Under-Secretary-General's Office. We
would hope that this gender advisor would be at a
sufficiently senior level in order to have access to the
Under-Secretary-General.

In conclusion, the need to appoint more women
as Special Representatives of the Secretary-General has
been highlighted. We note that there has been some
improvement, but we hope that more will be done. In
this regard, we encourage Member States to endeavour
to put forward to the Secretary-General names of
women with the requisite experience and qualifications
who can fulfil this task.

