Mr. Wai (Myanmar): Mr. President, I thank you
for the opportunity to take part in this open debate on
women and peace and security. My delegation
identifies with the view that gender equality plays an
essential part in promoting and advancing peace and
security. We therefore wish to commend the Ghanaian
presidency of the Security Council for taking the
initiative to hold this open debate. My delegation also
wishes to commend the Secretary-General for his
report focusing on the United Nations System-wide
Action Plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

We note that the area covered by the report is
large and diverse. The implementation review of the
2005-2007 Action Plan provides a good starting point
for the way ahead. It shows that progress has been
achieved in many substantive areas of the Action Plan.
It also confirms the existence of institutional and
organizational gaps and challenges in the
implementation of the Plan by the United Nations
system. We also note that the 2008-2009 Action Plan
attempts a sharpened focus. The original 12 areas of
action contained in the 2005-2007 Plan have now been
reconsolidated into five thematic areas, namely,
prevention, participation, protection, relief and
recovery, and normative initiatives.

In Myanmar's national effort to promote gender
equality, organizations such as the Myanmar Women's
Affairs Federation, the Myanmar Women
Entrepreneurs Association and the Myanmar Maternal
and Child Welfare Association play an important role.
Hand in hand with these organizations, the
Government promotes policies to ensure that the needs
and priorities of women and girls are addressed. In this
regard, Myanmar's traditions and culture play an
important part. Traditional law guarantees the equal
rights of women, including the right to own and inherit

property.
We subscribe to the View that development, peace
and security and human rights are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. Women and girls are the most
vulnerable among the population who suffer from
conflicts. More often than not the root causes of
conflict are poverty and socio-economic and gender
inequality. In the case of my country, which has
emerged from over four decades of insurgency, the
main cause has been weakness of the State constitution
that was imposed upon us at the time of independence.
Until recently, Myanmar has had to face the challenge
posed by 18 insurgent armed groups. However, the
Government's policy of national reconciliation has
resulted in the return of 17 of these groups to the legal
fold.

Today, we are implementing a political road map,
the first crucial stage of which is the adoption of a new
State constitution that is acceptable to the entire Union,
made up of over 100 ethnicities. Recently, we
successfully completed a national convention, which
laid down the basic principles to be enshrined in the
new constitution. On 18 October, the Government
formed a commission to draft a new constitution. Once
completed, it will be put to a national referendum.

Myanmar's traditions, culture and values, which
facilitate our national efforts to promote gender
equality, are important pillars in the Government's
commitment to protect women and girls from human
rights abuses, including sexual and gender-based
violence. My delegation therefore takes exception to
the allegations of sexual violence levelled against the
Myanmar armed forces. In this connection, we
categorically reject the unfounded allegations made
this morning by the representative of the United
Kingdom.

Let me set the record straight. The Myanmar
military has been falsely accused of gang rape on the
basis of reports issued by the expatriate Shari Women's
Action Network (SWAN), the Shan Human Rights
Foundation (SHRF) and the Kareni Human Rights
Group (KHRG). It should be noted that in 2002, the
United States Department of State's country report on
Myanmar identified both SHRF and KHRG as
organizations that have associations with insurgent
armed groups. The allegations levelled at the Myanmar
military come from those groups that are associated
with the insurgents.
The Security Council has had first-hand
experience with reports emanating from exiles that are
at variance with reality. Rape, let alone gang rape, is
regarded by the Myanmar people and Government as a
most dastardly and abhorrent crime. Whenever such a
crime is committed, we make sure that the full force of
law is applied against the perpetrators. Three separate
investigations regarding these allegations have been
carried out by the authorities and organizations
concerned, including the Myanmar Women's Affairs
Federation. In genuine cases, perpetrators were
prosecuted and sentenced in accordance with the law.

The report of Secretary-General has rightly
pointed out that in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), concerted efforts of Governments and
civil societies at the country level are vital for success.
We are encouraged that the recommendations to further
accelerate the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) include the need for the international
community to support national implementation. We
also look forward to the early establishment of the
database of good practices envisaged in the Secretary-
General's report. Both the United Nations and its
national partners can put to good use the knowledge
resulting from the good practices and lessons learned
on the implementation of Resolution 1325 (2000).

