The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, Djibouti,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women; and Ms. Randa Siniora
Atallah, General Director of the Women's Centre for
Legal Aid and Counselling.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principal Adviser on Gender and
the Implementation of United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women and Peace and
Security of the European External Action Service of
the European Union; Ms. Narjes Saidane, Permanent
Observer of the International Organization of la
Francophonie to the United Nations; Ms. Amarsanaa
Darisuren, Senior Adviser on Gender Issues of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
and Ms. Clare Hutchinson, Special Representative of
the NATO Secretary-General of for Women, Peace
and Security.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/900, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.

I wish to also draw the attention ofCouncil members
to document S/2018/904, which contains a letter dated
9 October 2018 from the Permanent Representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, and give him
the floor.

