Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, let me thank the Japanese presidency for
the organization of this open debate that reflects the
commitment of the Security Council to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I am also
grateful for the participation of those speakers who
preceded me, whose statements give us a clearer
picture of the progress and the gaps in this process of
implementation of the resolution.

From a human rights perspective, Argentina
attaches high priority to the situation of women in
conflict and the participation of women in peace
processes and in the peacebuilding phase. Resolution
1325 (2000) is the legal framework that allows us to
make this participation effective at both the national
and international levels. At this time, the debate should
focus on the role of women in peacebuilding. On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to recall here
once again the important role that women played in the
democratization process in Argentina when they fought
for human rights and decided to unite in the search for
the truth as to the whereabouts of their children and
grandchildren who had been victims of the forced
disappearances or kidnappings which characterized the
military dictatorship in Argentina.

However, at the time, these groups of women had
no international legal framework to protect them on
their path towards the truth. At the time, the
international community looked upon the women as
victims of conflicts rather than protagonists of a peace
process or fundamental participants in the building of a
lasting peace.

Our own experience makes us aware of the
importance of carrying out national action plans for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). These plans
should be drawn up through a participative process that
should include monitoring and accountability
mechanisms whereby Governments would ensure not
only that a greater number of women participated in
decision-making but also that their demands and needs
were taken into consideration at all levels of State,
especially in the process of institutional reform,
including the reform of the legislative, judicial and
security sectors.

From the perspective of the United Nations
system, we feel that it is necessary to ensure a
systematic implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in
all areas of its work, starting with the inclusion of a
gender perspective in all resolutions of this Council,
including resolutions that establish or extend a peace
operation, and in the terms of reference of the missions
undertaken by its members.
We hope that the now functional Peacebuilding
Commission, with the support and assistance of
Carolyn McAskie, will prove a useful instrument
which will allow us to incorporate a gender policy in
all post-conflict situations that come before this body
for consideration.

Although the subject of this debate is confined to
the roles of women in the consolidation of peace, my
delegation would nevertheless like to refer to the
violence suffered by women and girls in armed
conflicts solely due to their gender. We support the
publication of the report of the Secretary-General on
all forms of violence against women (A/61/122/Add.1).
We believe that it is essential that the Security Council
be regularly informed of instances of such violence, so
that it can contribute to putting an end to the impunity
often enjoyed by perpetrators and to holding
accountable the parties to the conflict responsible for
such violations.

In conclusion, we believe that the commitment so
often expressed vis-a-vis the situation of women and
gender equality must be translated into real efforts to
give women a voice in peace-consolidation processes;
lead to the reform of institutions, to take into
consideration the needs of women; and bring about the
establishment of national and international mechanisms
for accountability as regards the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

My country supports the draft presidential
statement on this item, which will be read out by the
President at the end of this meeting.

