Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Egyptian presidency for convening this
meeting. It is my special pleasure to welcome Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed. I thank her for
her comprehensive briefing and the Permanent Observer
of the African Union, Ambassador Tete Antenio, for
his very useful contribution.

Italy commends the leadership of the Deputy
Secretary-General in having organized the first-ever
joint high-level mission with the African Union focused
on women's meaningful participation in peace, security
and development. We welcome it for three main reasons.

First, the mission has paved the way for a more
sustained partnership with the African Union in that
area, which we applaud and fully encourage.

Secondly, the initiative aims at tackling a problem
for which the United Nations system has always
been criticized, namely its work in silos, which has
prevented at times an efficient response to crises. In
keeping with resolution 2242 (2015), it is vital that we
ensure better mainstreaming of the gender perspective
in the development, prioritization, coordination and
implementation of policies and programmes.

Thirdly, it is important that the United Nations
continue in its advocacy and engagement in the field
so as to support national authority in ending all current
violations and holding all perpetrators accountable.

In this regard, we do not consider it a coincidence
that the notorious rebel commander and warlord Ntabo
Ntaberi Sheka, who was implicated in the brutal mass
rape of at least 387 civilians in Walikale in 2010,
decided to surrender to MONUSCO on 26 July while
the Mission was in place.

As its visit has demonstrated, advancing gender
equality and promoting women's active involvement in
the peace process are essential for achieving sustainable
development as well as lasting peace and security. As
exemplified by the many women whom the Deputy
Secretary-General met during her mission, women
are a driving force in development, even in the most
challenging situations. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for instance, displaced women, despite
their dramatic living conditions in refugee camps,
have succeeded in organizing some form of access to
microcredit, enabling them not only to survive but even
to contribute to their communities.

In the meeting with Government officials, the
women and peace and security discourse, namely, the
revitalization of women's participation and leadership
in the peace and security process, was meant to be
an entry point for an initial dialogue with the local
authorities in both Nigeria and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Italy welcomes the choice made by the Deputy
Secretary-General to visit Nigeria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In Nigeria, Boko Haram
continues to be a major threat to peace and security,
also because of several cases of abduction targeting
women, such as the one involving the Chibok girls
perpetrated by that terrorist group. During the Security
Council mission to the Lake Chad basin in March, of
which I had the privilege of being part, we observed
the strong engagement of local government in the fight
against Boko Haram and other terrorist groups and the
attention devoted to promoting the participation of civil
society in the fight against radicalization.

It was stressed by the main interlocutors that a
crucial role was played in this regard by women's
organizations in particular. It is critical for us to keep
supporting such efforts.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where I
had the privilege of serving my embassy for more than
three years, we witnessed one of the worst humanitarian
crises in the world, with a total of 3.8 million internally
displaced persons. We believe that it is important to pay
close attention to the situation. In this context, women
and children suffer most of the consequences, both in
the eastern provinces and the Grand Kasai region. In
the Grand Kasai region in particular, we hope that the
Government will conduct a prompt, transparent and
independent investigation to establish the facts and
the circumstances of the human rights violations and
abuses perpetrated over the past months.

In this regard, while recalling that the Congolese
authorities have the primary responsibility to protect
their people, we hope that the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will continue to be provided with the
resources necessary to assist the Local government in
the promotion and protection of human rights.

Allow me to reiterate our deep concern at the
current political situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which is one of the causes of the current
wave of violence. The swift implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement is urgent, together with
the full implementation of the confidence-building
measures agreed in that same agreement. Critical steps
must be taken in order to organize elections as soon as
possible, with the full and equal participation ofwomen.

To conclude, I would like to once again assure the
Deputy Secretary-General and the Council that we will
continue to promote and support women's participation
and leadership in peace, security and development in
Africa and help the continent achieve its Agenda 2063.

