Mr. Kadangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I want to thank your country, the United
Kingdom, for having organized today's debate on the
theme "Women and peace and security", especially
sexual violence in armed conflict, and to welcome your
presence among us to lead our work. I also welcome
the Ministers of France, Guatemala and Morocco. Their
presence in this debate reflects the interest that their
countries attach to this alarming issue.

I also thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab
Bangura, Ms. Angelina Jolie and Ms. Jane Adong
Anywar for their respective briefings.

I also thank the United States delegation for
its leadership in the preparation and negotiation of
resolution 2106 (2013), which we have just adopted.

Women and girls continue to be the victims of
Violence of all kinds during and after armed conflict,
despite all the efforts being made to prevent it. The
emergence of new armed groups in old conflicts, such
as those in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic, and the emergence
of new conflicts, such as those in Mali and Syria,
have undoubtedly increased the number of women and
girl victims of sexual violence. These armed groups,
with their generally undisciplined fighters, engage in
countless acts of violence that constitute crimes under
international law. We cannot exonerate national armed
forces from such human rights violations, since they
too harbour so-called rogue elements who commit
the same abuses as those committed by armed rebel
groups, particularly rape, which has now become a
tactic common to all belligerents.

As we noted in our statement on this issue in April
under the Rwandan presidency (see S/PV.6948), the
main underlying causes ofthe violence include poverty,
poor governance, the democratic deficit, revenge and
the desire for racial domination and to impose one's
culture or religion. This reality is common to all
countries in conflict, and such problems should be
taken into account by all Governments while their
countries enjoy peace and stability.

There can be no doubt that atrocities against
women and girls will continue to be committed if their
authors have no fear of being caught and if aggressors
are not prosecuted and punshed. We believe that verbal
condemnations and promises to act are no longer
enough. We must go further by seeking to further
educate not only military and Government leaders,
but also rebel movements. Raising awareness among
the commanders of these forces on the protection of
civilians, respect for international legal instruments,
humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as
the effective implementation of relevant agreements,
should be favored and supported.

Peace missions are already working in these areas,
and we thank them for it. However, we believe that
capacity-building would contribute further towards
that goal. We stress and welcome the particular role
of women's protection advisers and gender advisers
in peacekeeping operations, as was highlighted at the
Arria formula meeting of 17 May organized by Australia
and Guatemala under the Togolese presidency of the
Security Council. These advisers should be present in
all peace missions.

We must address the issue of impunity through
the adoption of strict provisions. In this regard, the
United Nations should assist States in developing
or establishing mechanisms of cooperation through
bilateral or regional agreements for the arrest and
extradition of alleged perpetrators of violence against
women and girls. and by strengthening the capacity of
national courts, whose weaknesses with respect to this
issue tend to perpetuate the violence.

However, we believe that if the fight against
impunity is to succeed, we must establish effective
cooperation between national and international
courts, and between them and States, including in the
enforcement of arrest warrants and other decisions. All
too often, unfortunately, we note a lack of political will
in that regard. We must remember that every State must
try and prosecute the perpetrators of serious human
rights violations on its territory. States must cooperate
to that end.

Women and girls are the primary victims of
violations of their fundamental human rights in armed
conflict. They must therefore be part of the solution.
As the French representative has pointed out, they
must be stakeholders and not passive subjects. It is
therefore important to involve them in every mediation
and peacebuilding process in the aftermath of conflict.
We welcome the Security Council's commitment to
ensuring the greater involvement and higher numbers
of women in peacekeeping operations so that they can
play a significant role in victim protection.

Despite all the difficulties and the need to ensure
the protection of women and girls in armed conflict
and to prosecute their attackers, there is still the hope
that combating such violence will succeed thanks to the
commitment and efforts of the international community.
We wish to commend the efforts of UN-Women, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and many
international and non-governmental organizations to
that end. However, their advocacy must include a plea
for the universalization of the Arms Trade Treaty,
because its implementation by all States, particularly
those where weapons are manufactured, could make a
big contribution to ending the sale and illegal trafficking
of arms in countries in conflict. Such weapons fuel
conflict and violence, particularly against women and
girls.

