Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia- and the associated
countries, Cyprus and Malta, align themselves with this
statement.

Allow me to thank you, Sir, on behalf of the
European Union, for having inscribed on our agenda
the theme of women and peace and security. The
Security Council's interest in the specific situation of
women is recent. The Council paid tribute to their
special role on 8 March 2000 on the occasion of
International Women's Day, on the initiative of the
President at the time, the Ambassador of Bangladesh.
This debate logically follows from the interest
accorded in the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and the competence of the Council regarding peace and
security.

Our work should not disregard those involved
elsewhere in the United Nations. The question of
women in conflict was one of the 12 action areas of the
Beijing Platform for Action, and the follow-up special
session of the General Assembly held in June 2000,
which rightly included "peace" in its title, took up and
strengthened the recommendations on this topic. The
role of women in all situations, I have no doubt, will be
taken into account by the Security Council.

My first comment is that when we deal with
conflict the role of women seems to be basically
passive. Women are generally mentioned only as
victims. To the extent that it is civilians that suffer
most from conflicts, women represent a high
percentage of the victims. It is therefore important that
peacekeeping forces be sensitized and trained to bear in
mind in their missions women's specific protection
needs. In recent years particular attention has been paid
to the use of sexual violence as a method of warfare.
These acts of aggression basically target women, who
are sometimes the victims of systematic rape and
gender-based acts of aggression. These acts must not
go unpunished.

In this regard, the European Union is happy that
the International Criminal Court describes as war
crimes, and in specific circumstances crimes against
humanity, acts of sexual violence committed in times
of conflict. It appeals to all States to sign or ratify the
Statute of the International Criminal Court and to
incorporate its principles into their national legislation.

Women also constitute a high proportion of
refugees and displaced persons, which makes them
extremely vulnerable. The European Union is
concerned about the development of trafficking in
persons in conflict situations. We welcome the progress
towards the adoption of the draft Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its protocols,
particularly that relating to trafficking in persons. We
appeal for the speedy conclusion of this work.

Ending violence is a twofold challenge: on the
one hand, the duty to see justice done, and, on the
other, the need for reconciliation. Women have often
played a decisive role in this area, particularly in
Africa - I am thinking of Burundi, for example-
and Latin America. We all recall the example of the
Plaza de Mayo grandmothers, who ensured that the
memory of the disappeared would not sink into
oblivion.

This example also shows us - and this brings me
to my second comment - that women are not just
victims in conflict situations; they can play an essential
role in conflict resolution and in rebuilding. While still
under-represented in decision-making positions,
women have started to participate actively in conflict
resolution, in peacekeeping, in defence and in foreign
affairs. It is important to create the conditions in which
more of them can become stakeholders.

Within the competent bodies of the United
Nations, it is taken for granted that women must be
able to be heard and to have access to decision-making
positions. We must increasingly appoint women with
the necessary experience and competence to the posts
of special representatives or envoys. Here we have a
reservoir of human resources that the United Nations
does not use to the fullest.

The Brahimi report (S/2000/809) gives an
opportunity for an in-depth discussion of integrated
strategies for conflict prevention and peace-building. It
would appear that the role of women has not been
mainstreamed, including in the recommendations on
the training of United Nations field staff. The new
importance assigned to the civilian aspects of
peacekeeping operations should enable women to
participate more fully. A balanced composition of
teams should be sought to allow women to use their
widely recognized ability to make contact with local
communities and share in the realities of their daily
life. We hope that this question will be taken into
consideration in the follow-up to this report.

In their own countries, women must be
encouraged to participate in reconciliation and
rebuilding; it is something they already do. We should
also study ways to better involve civil society,
particularly women's organizations, in areas vital to
reconstruction, such as justice. It is also essential to
maintain basic social services, particularly for women
and children, in post-conflict situations.

Social cohesion, which is necessary to stabilize
States emerging from conflict situations or threatened
by them, is promoted by equality between men and
women and respect for their rights. Rebuilding a
country's democratic institutions and its political and
public life must involve the participation of women in
the decision-making process, because of the need for
gender equality. In this regard, the European Union
welcomes the initiatives taken by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and, within the Stability Pact for the
Balkans, the establishment of a working group which
has drawn up a plan of action for gender equality.

The European Union also stresses that this
question figures prominently in the Declaration
adopted at the Millennium Summit, which we must
implement for the benefit of the peoples concerned.

