Mr. Medan (Croatia): At the outset, I wish to thank
the Russian presidency for convening an open debate
on this crucial topic.

Croatia aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security,
respectively. Allow me to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.

There is a strong correlation between gender
equality, peace and development. Gender equality is
the only effective way to achieve sustainable peace and
development. Not only women, but societies in general
benefit from women's increased participation in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. Resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security set out a visionary agenda for achieving
gender equality as a prerequisite for peaceful, inclusive
and just societies.

Nearly 16 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the international community has
undertaken substantial efforts to implement it, and
undeniable progress has been made, including action
plans, guidelines, programmes and training. Awareness
has been raised of the need to include women in
conflict prevention and resolution, peacebuilding and
decision-making. However, the high-level review of
resolution 1325 (2000) mandated under resolution
2122 (2013), which took place in October 2015, has
shown that the protection of women in armed conflict,
parallel to the enhancement of their contribution to
peace processes and in rebuilding their communities,
continues to be a crucial challenge.

As underlined in the global study, women's
participation in decision-making in the sphere of
peace and security worldwide remains unacceptably
low, while the extent of sexual violence against
women and girls in conflict situations continues to
be devastating. What we need now is to translate the
existing commitments into concrete actions that would
bring tangible benefits for the advancement of women
and girls in their political and economic empowerment,
as well as the full realization of their human rights in
times of both conflict and peace.

Member States have the primary responsibility
to ensure that global commitments and obligations
concerning women and peace and security are
integrated into domestic policies and laws. In that
regard, more cooperation between Member States
would certainly advance the women and peace and
security agenda and improve its implementation. That
is why Croatia strongly supports the establishment
of the Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender
Equality under the aegis of the Office ofthe Focal Point
for Women in the United Nations. We are convinced
that the Network can greatly assist Member States and
regional organizations in improving and strengthening
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, thereby complementing other existing
regional and United Nations initiatives, such as those of
the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security
in New York and Geneva, different regional task forces
and civil society.

Croatia's continued engagement in the area of
women and peace and security rests on our firm
belief that the full realization of women's rights is
an indispensable basis for safeguarding basic human
rights and achieving lasting peace and security. Croatia
has therefore taken steps to integrate the gender
perspective into the national foreign and security
policy through its national policy for the promotion of
gender equality and its first national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). One of the
most important results of the first national action plan
cycle has been an increased level of awareness of the
role of women in the area of peace and security and
the more effective integration of the gender perspective
into our foreign and security policy and actions. In the
national security sector, the gender perspective has
also been strengthened with an increased number of
women involved in the activities of the security system,
including intelligence agencies and their increased
presence at the decision-making level.

The national action plan has also contributed to
the appropriate, gender-integrated training of troops to
be deployed to peacekeeping missions and operations
and to an increased number of female members of
the Croatian armed forces and police involved in
international peacekeeping and civilian missions. Under
the action plan, Croatia is also undertaking efforts to
provide gender-sensitive development assistance, such
as assistance for women and girls in Afghanistan in the
areas of education, women's reproductive health and
small businesses.

Croatia is currently in the process of developing
its second national action plan, which is expected to
be adopted by the end of the year. It will cover both
our domestic and international activities by setting
out and strengthening specific measures in the area of
prevention and protection, as well as the representation
ofwomen in decision-making and processes concerning
security and peacebuilding.

As a country having recently experienced war and
acquired post-conflict management experience, we
are particularly interested in sharing our experiences
and lessons learned as a contribution to wider, global
efforts in preventing and combating sexual violence
in war and conflict. As a member of the group of
global champions of the Preventing Sexual Violence
in Combat initiative, Croatia will spare no effort in
preventing and combating sexual violence in war and
conflicts, and will continue to give its firm support to
all areas of the women and peace and security agenda.
We strongly believe that, if peace and security are to
be sustained, women must be empowered, their voices
heard and their participation ensured.

