Ms. Anderson (Ireland): Conflict-related sexual
violence is an issue that, in recent years, has continued
to rise on the international agenda. Such attention has
been driven by several factors, including the sustained
leadership shown by the Council; the work of the
Secretary-General and the authoritative and passionate
voice of his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict; and the efforts of Member States and those
of civil society organizations, which do so much to
amplify the voices of marginalized women and men.

Last week's forthright Group of Eight declaration is
clear evidence ofhow high-profile the issue has become.
I would like to commend the United Kingdom on the
leadership that it has demonstrated with its Preventing
Sexual Violence Initiative. We look forward to that
momentum being maintained with a further Security
Council debate in June.

Such high-profile action and momentum - and
even more of both - are desperately needed. The recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/l49) sets out
the brutal realities facing women in conflict situations
today. It does not shirk from going into exhaustive
and difficult detail. That includes the 1,700 rape cases
registered in and around Mogadishu last year, almost one
third of which involved child victims; the use of sexual
violence in Syria during house searches, at checkpoints
and in detention; and the scale, savagery and systematic
nature of conflict-related sexual violence in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Despite its range and specificity, the Secretary-
General's report is far from comprehensive. As the
report points out, sexual violence is almost universally
underreported. The information it presents is therefore
only indicative of the scope and character of sexual
violence being committed against women, children and
men.

The report needs to be updated almost as soon
as it is written. As an example, the latest information
reaching us about the Central African Republic
suggests a situation out of control, with sexual violence
employed on all sides as an instrument of conflict.

Faced with such horrors, how can we translate the
concern voiced around this table into meaningful action
on the ground? I would like to focus onjust three points,
following on from the European Union statement and
from the statement by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, both of which Ireland has aligned itself with.

The first issue relates to ending impunity, which
is absolutely critical to ensuring both accountability
and effective deterrence. That requires a multi-pronged
approach: building national capacity to investigate
and prosecute acts of sexual violence; further steps to
ensure that international criminal justice deals with
sexual violence in a more systematic and consistent
manner; and further consideration of how the Security
Council can act more effectively in applying targeted
sanctions.

The steps already taken by the Security Council
in relation to targeted sanctions are welcome and
significant, but there is more to be done. As the
non-profit organization Security Council Report
identified in its recent cross-cutting report, political
caution in the Council has precluded a more ambitious
use of sanctions in the women, peace and security
context. To achieve more traction and to deliver more
results, the Council needs to be more consistent and
comprehensive in its approach.

One of the core recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General's report is that all the Security
Council Sanctions Committees include a focus on
crimes of sexual violence and that the Council expand
its institutional capacity so as to develop ways to apply
sanctions where no such committees are in place.
Ireland strongly endorses that recommendation, and
we hope at our next open debate, in June, to hear of
progress being made towards its fulfilment.

The second issue concerns the deployment of
women's protection advisers. One particular innovation
that has made a real difference and has had a catalytic
impact on the ground is the deployment of more
women's protection advisers to missions. I reiterate
the call by the Group of Friends for the necessary and
specific budgetary resources to be identified to ensure
that women's protection advisers are deployed where
they are needed in all the relevant Security Council-
mandated missions.

The third issue is the focus on participation. A
defining feature of the resolution 1325 (2000) agenda is
that it goes beyond protection to embrace empowerment.

There is an inextricable connection between
women's treatment in peacetime and their treatment
in conflict. As Special Representative Bangura put it
recently:

"If women are seen as second-class citizens in
peacetime, their rights will not be respected when
there is unrest. If they are viewed as unimportant
before war breaks out, they will be treated as
expendable during conflict".

Empowerment cannot and will not happen without
women's participation. Promoting participation is
a challenge that is shared right across the United
Nations system, but the Security Council clearly has
responsibilities within its remit. The detailed and
independent Security Council Report to which I
referred earlier gives cause for concern in that regard.
While acknowledging progress on other aspects of the
resolution 1325 (2000) agenda, it finds that:

"There are worrying indications that the

Council's focus is less sharp when it comes to the

women's participation aspect".

That imbalance needs to be addressed. The Security
Council should factor women's participation into all its
deliberations and decisions in a systematic way. Such a
focus is essential if we are to move beyond symptoms
and to address root causes.

Finally, let me briefly update the Council on
developments in Ireland. We are currently undertaking
an independent review of our resolution 1325 (2000)
national action plan and, in the interests of transparency
and sharing lessons learned, we intend to make public
the main lessons identified as part of that process. I
would also like to note that the Irish Defence Forces
are breaking new ground in producing their own
resolution 1325 (2000) action plan so as to ensure that
the objectives for which they bear responsibility are
delivered.

As we know, sexual violence in conflict is vicious
and pitiless, and there is no sign of it abating. Rather,
the roll call of shame continues to grow ever longer.
Insofar as today's debate strengthens our resolve and
brings us closer to achieving a real and life-changing
impact on the ground, it will indeed be worthwhile.

