Mr. Roet (Israel): The Secretary-General's 2016
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361)
is a catalog of stories and statistics that shock the
conscience: a Da'esh competition on memorizing the
Koran, with a Yazidi woman as the grand prize; public
auctions where women are sold to the highest bidder; and
a widely distributed magazine containing "questions
and answers" on the Da'esh code of sexual enslavement.

This level of cruelty and denial of basic humanity
is almost unimaginable. But for women and girls living
under the barbaric rule of Da'esh, this is a daily reality.
The conflict-related horrors that women face are by no
means limited to Da'esh-controlled territory.

Accounts of rape; sexual slavery; child, early and
forced marriage; and other forms of sexual violence
are widespread and attest to the impunity that the
perpetrators enjoy.

Over and over again, in conflicts around the
world, we have seen that sexual violence is not just a
byproduct of conflict; it is a deliberate weapon of war
and a tactic of terror. In Syria, sexual violence has been
systematically employed. Government forces use rape
to suppress anti-Al-Assad resistance in communities
associated with opposition forces. Detention centres
and checkpoints throughout the country have become
notorious sites of sexual violence.

Instead of protecting Syrian women, the Al-Assad
regime is using terror tactics against them.

The world is facing the most severe refugee crisis
since the Second World War. The crisis has left millions
without a home, without money and without hope.
Criminal elements have taken advantage of the plight
of these refugees to engage in the trafficking of women
and girls for commercial sex and sexual slavery. In some
notorious cases, smugglers require sex as payment for
transportation across national borders.

The dreams of mothers and fathers, sons and
daughters, ofa new life on safer shores are shattered by
the nightmare of sexual violence and exploitation.

Violent extremist terrorist groups such as Da'esh
and Boko Haram have adopted the most depraved forms
of sexual violence as a key part oftheir official ideology.

The systematic sexual enslavement and trafficking
of women is part of their method of recruitment,
their source of revenue and their means of terrorizing
the population.

Da'esh lures young men and boys, including foreign
fighters, with the promise of sex slaves. Yazidi women
recount being forced to marry new recruits and being
exchanged as gifts between veteran fighters. Many
girls and women have attempted suicide to avoid forced
marriages or religious conversion. For them, falling
into the hands of Da'esh is a fate worse than death.
Trafficking in women and girls knows no
boundaries. Extremist groups are utilizing social media
to advertise the availability of women for sale. Da'esh
posts pictures of kidnapped women on its Facebook
page, listing their background, their skills and a
price tag.

All perpetrators of sexual violence should be held
to account, especially when they are the ones sent to
prevent such heinous crimes from happening in the
first place.

We strongly support the zero-tolerance policy of
the Secretary-General. United Nations peacekeepers
and non-United Nations forces who have broken the
very trust that has been bestowed upon them must be
brought to justice.

Let me also emphasize that Israel believes very
strongly in the protection and empowerment of young
girls and proudly sponsored resolution 68/148, of 2014,
on child, early, and forced marriage to help put an end
to the practice of child marriage.

It is hard to believe that such human cruelty, in the
form of sexual violence, even exists. At times you want
to tell yourself that these atrocities are happening in
another universe. But they are not. They are happening
in our world, in our time and on our watch. Think of
the 219 girls of Chibok, Nigeria, still missing from their
homes; think of their fathers and mothers praying every
night for the day they will see their daughters again.
Think of the thousands of Yazidi girls abducted, sold as
slaves, raped and impregnated.

Now think of what each and every one of us would
do if these were our own daughters and our own wives.
And now, let us not just think of them; let us act, and let
us act as if they were our own. This kind of evil has no
place in our world. Let us unite to defeat it.

