Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, for her
impassioned briefing. I would also like to pay tribute
to the commendable efforts of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon to promote the women and peace and
security agenda.

I would also like to thank Ms. Rita Lopida for her
moving statement. She gave voice to the suffering of
women in South Sudan. During its latest visit to Juba
and Wau, the Security Council witnessed that reality
with its own eyes.

This meeting is particularly important as it has
been a year since the adoption of historic resolution
2242 (2015) and the issuance of the global study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Despite the
many gains achieved on the issues of women and peace
and security during the past 16 years, there is only
temporary progress.

Women and girls remain the primary Victims in areas
of conflict. In that vein, through its current membership
of the Security Council, Egypt is committed to sparing
no effort in supporting and developing the women
and peace and security agenda and implementing
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2242 (2015), thereby
ensuring the protection of women in areas of armed
conflict and in other situations. It should also ensure
its genuine participation in maintaining and building
peace. In that regard, we look forward to cooperating
with Secretary-General designate Antonio Guterres.

In line with our follow-up to the implementation of
the recommendations of the global study, we would like
to stress the following.

First, it is important to strike a balance between
the two main the pillars of the women and peace and
security agenda: protection and participation. The
international community must pay sufficient attention
to providing and delivering the necessary protection to
women in conflict and post-conflict areas, in parallel
with promoting women's participation, so as to ensure
complementarity between both pillars. Providing
protection to women is a necessary precondition for their
effective participation during the post-conflict period.

Secondly, the women and peace and security
agenda continues to ignore the suffering of women
under foreign occupation. Palestinian women continue
to suffer under the yoke of Israeli occupation. Men are
not effectively participating in the implementation of
the agenda, which undermines its all-round credibility.

Thirdly, we must strengthen the gender-based
structure and gender-technical expertise within the
framework of the United Nations system and provide
assistance to States to build their capacities within that
framework, including increasing financial resources to
facilitate implementing the commitments of the women
and peace and security agenda and resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2242 (2015).

Fourthly, it is important to coordinate all United
Nations efforts, enlisting all its organs, including civil
society, regional organizations and communities, to
implement the recommendations of the global study.
That would avoid any duplication, redundancy or
controversy in carrying out such activities. We should
ensure coherence, as well, between the implementation
of the recommendations of the special review of
resolution 1325 (2000) mandated under resolution
2122 (2013) and the recommendations included in
other United Nations reviews. We should provide
the necessary financial resources to establish the
institutional framework, which will facilitate the follow-
up to the implementation of such recommendations. In
that regard, we look forward to the contributions of the
Secretary-General designate to provide new proposals
to develop an effective institutional framework to
enhance the women and peace and security agenda in
the United Nations.

Fifthly, the recent adoption by the Peacebuilding
Commission of the gender strategy, as well as the
Peacebuilding Fund's allocation of some ofits resources
to empowering women in post-conflict States, represent
important albeit preliminary steps to achieve the
desired goal.

Egypt recently joined the national focal point
network for women and peace and security established
by Spain, and participated in the foundational meeting
of the network. At the regional level, Egypt has
participated effectively in drafting an Arab regional
strategy to implement resolution 1325 (2000) under
the aegis of the League of Arab States and through
cooperation with UN-Women. We have culturally
tailored the women and peace and security agenda
to the Arab context so that it addresses the specific
situations of the Arab region, including in particular the
plight of Palestinian women in the occupied territories
and the role of women in combatting terrorism and
extremist ideologies.

At the national level, Egypt is committed to
providing gender-based training for its forces
participating in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Other institutions are also playing a vital
role in countering the adulterated religious opinions,
including fatwas, issued by terrorist organizations in
conflict areas, especially those affecting the status of
women. Finally, the the Egyptian Agency of Partnership
for Development provides assistance to regions in armed
conflict, and we are sensitive to the gender dimension
in providing assistance.

We call for a renewal of the political and moral
commitment to empowering women in conflict and
post-conflict areas. Women represent the primary
component in the transitional stage from conflict to
development and from a fragmented community, owing
to armed conflict, to a healthy one capable of moving
forward and providing sustainable peace.

