Mr. Starcevic' (Serbia): Let me first thank the
Security Council for the opportunity to address it today
on the very important topic of responding to the needs
of women and girls in post-conflict societies. I would
also like to thank the President of the Council, Mr. Le
Luong Minh, Ambassador of Viet Nam, and the
delegation of Viet Nam for organizing this open debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, and I will therefore limit myself to a few
remarks on the issue.

Several side events held during the course of the
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, such as
the marking of the sixtieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Geneva Conventions, the ministerial meetings on
the implementation of the Paris Commitments and on
violence against girls, as well as the adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009) on women and peace and
security in this body last week, have clearly indicated
the need for more concerted and decisive action at the
national and international levels in dealing with the
most vulnerable population in conflict and post-
conflict societies.
My country joined the sponsors of resolution
1888 (2009), thus expressing its determination and
commitment to work with the international community,
as well as at the national level, on the full
implementation of the cornerstone resolution 1325
(2000), the tenth anniversary of whose adoption we
will commemorate next year, and of all subsequent
Security Council resolutions on that issue. I believe
that resolution 1889 (2009), adopted today, will further
contribute to our common goals of eliminating all
forms of violence against women and girls, improving
women's participation in post-conflict planning and
peacebuilding, and their full participation in decision-
making.

The last decade of the twentieth century was
marked by intolerance, violence and conflicts in the
region of the former Yugoslavia. Vulnerable groups,
such as women, children, the elderly and others, were
indeed the most affected by those tragic events. Even
today, 10 years after the countries of the South-Eastern
European region significantly improved their
cooperation in their advance towards membership of
the European Union, Serbia continues to provide
shelter to more than 90,000 refugees from
neighbouring countries and over 200,000 internally
displaced persons (IDPs) from our southern province
of Kosovo, many of whom are single mothers, girls and
older women.

Serbia has spared no efforts in providing
assistance and support to these populations during their
protracted displacement. We firmly believe that there is
a need for a more visible and substantial engagement
of the international community in the province of
Kosovo, as well as stronger regional cooperation, to
find a durable and sustainable solution for the refugees
and IDPs.

With the painful experience of conflict behind us
and after the democratic changes in the Republic of
Serbia, my country has embarked upon a
comprehensive process of democratic reforms in the
fields of the economy, justice, security and human
rights. In those processes, the empowerment of women
through their full engagement in decision-making has
been recognized as vital to the ongoing reforms.
During the past 10 years, we have made significant
efforts to ensure greater representation of women in
Parliament and other decision-making bodies.

Today, in Serbia, women hold many high-ranking
positions in all three branches of the Government. The
Speaker of Parliament, as well as the Ministers of
Finance, Justice and Youth and Sports, are women. The
increase in the number of women in the judiciary is
also significant. The Presidents of the Constitutional
Court and of the Supreme Court are women. Women
judges are dealing with the most sensitive cases, such
as processing war crimes, organized crime and
corruption. The presence of women in the police and
the military is also increasing.

Bearing in mind the importance of the
engagement of women in peacekeeping, peacemaking
and peacebuilding operations, the Republic of Serbia
has so far deployed 14 women in its contingents in
several United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Last but not least, recognizing the significance of
the role of civil society in addressing the issues of
women and girls in post-conflict situations, I would
like to mention that in Serbia there is a very vibrant
network of non-governmental organizations led by
women, who are very active in addressing the issues of
war crimes, transitional justice and reconciliation.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council that the
Republic of Serbia will continue to support the efforts
of the Security Council on these important issues and
that we will strive to contribute to the full
implementation of its resolutions, including the one
adopted today.

