Mr. Medan (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Spanish presidency of the Security Council
for convening this high-level debate on women and
peace and security. We also welcome the adoption of
the new resolution 2242 (2015), on women and peace
and security, earlier this morning, which we were also
glad to sponsor.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union earlier, and I would
like to make some additional remarks in my national
capacity.

We welcome the high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) as an
invaluable occasion to reflect on the current status
of the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, and to make concrete commitments
to its full realization. Croatia can attest from its own
experience to the devastating effects of war on women
and girls, and attaches particular importance to their
protection and empowerment. Although we know that
women are more likely to suffer in times of conflict, by
no means does that imply that they should be reduced to
being victims only. Indeed, women are powerful agents
of peace and security, and their political participation
is a path towards development, as well as for good
governance and democracy. That is why we need more
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
as well as in the maintenance of a sustainable and
inclusive peace.

Despite the development of policies, action plans,
guidelines, programmes and training in the 15 years
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), women
continue to face significant barriers to successfully
participating and playing roles in those processes. The
number of women participating in decision-making
in the peace and security spheres worldwide remains
unacceptably low, while grave abuses and violence
against women, including sexual violence and rape,
continue to be devastating. The rise of radicalization,
violent extremism and terrorism only further aggravates
the atrocities and human rights violations women and
girls are subjected to. Therefore, the protection of
women in armed conflict, parallel to the enhancement of
their contribution to peace processes and in rebuilding
their communities, still remains a crucial challenge.

Our focus must now be directed at bridging the
gaps between the global, regional and national policies
related to the women and peace and security agenda
and the realities of the situation on the ground. First and
foremost, more needs to be done at the national level.
The implementation of the resolution has to be country-
driven, and Member States need to take responsibility
for its success by ensuring that it is integrated into
national policies.

I am pleased to say that Croatia has taken steps
to integrate the gender perspective into its national
foreign and security policy, into its national policy for
the promotion of gender equality and its first national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Croatia is currently developing its second
national plan, which is expected to be adopted by
2016. The new plan will cover both our domestic and
international activities by setting out and strengthening
specific measures in the prevention and protection
spheres, and with regard to female representation in
decision-making activities and processes related to
security and peacebuilding.

In that context, with a view to further advancing
the women and peace and security agenda, Croatia
commits to further promote gender equality and gender
mainstreaming in the context of its foreign, security
and defence policies at all levels. We also commit to
nominate women for top-level positions in international
and regional peace and security organizations.
Similarly, we intend to focus specifically on the gender
dimension of Croatia's involvement in peacekeeping
missions and operations abroad and to actively promote
the participation of female officers and military
experts. We will also attach specific importance on
gender-related elements in predeployment training for
civilian and military personnel, including prevention
and response to sexual violence and on a zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
We will take measures to tackle the
underrepresentation of women in political
decision-making in order to achieve more balanced
participation by women and men in Croatian political
bodies and institutions at all levels. We commit to
increase the number of female heads of Croatia's
diplomatic representations. We will accord high
priority to the visibility of gender and women and
peace and security-related policy and action at national
and local levels, as well as ensure coordination among
the relevant national actors.

We will also support the broad participation of
civil society and women's organizations in all activities
related to the women and peace and security agenda. We
will promote the women and peace and security agenda
within other international organizations and initiatives,
in particular within the Equal Futures Partnership
during Croatia's chairmanship in 2016. And we commit
to providing development and humanitarian assistance
with an integrated gender perspective.

Let me conclude by underlining that what we
have heard today is a common understanding that
the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
should be viewed as much more than just a stocktaking
opportunity; it is first and foremost a vision-making
one. We have to work tirelessly so that our joint vision
expressed today translates into a reality that unleashes
the potential of each and every woman to achieve a
world free of conflicts.

