Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Albania aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, so I will just add a couple of remarks
in my national capacity.
The protection of civilian populations is at the core
of the mandate of the United Nations and the agenda of
the Security Council. Yet civilians continue to suffer
and are the primary victims of all conflicts. It is indeed
highly regrettable that in the twenty-first century the
outbreak, persistence and escalation of armed conflicts,
and the recurrence of violence in post-conflict settings
all over the world, have taken a particular toll on women
and girls.

As the September report of the Secretary-General
on women and peace and security points out, in
many parts of the world the situation has deteriorated
significantly. We remain deeply concerned that,
according to the report, there has been

"a series of deeply troubling developments and
abhorrent crimes linked to violent conflict and
terrorism leading to new mass displacements,
humanitarian catastrophes and serious violations
of international humanitarian and human rights
law." (S/2014/693, para. 76)

As a result, for the first time in the post-Second World
War era, the number of refugees, asylum-seekers and
internally displaced people worldwide has exceeded
50 million, most of them women and children.

Thousands of men, women and children from all
ethnic and religious groups have been savagely killed
and many more today remain at risk of genocidal
slaughter at the hands of newly emerging terror
groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
and Boko Haram. Unrivalled in their savagery, they
have specifically targeted women and girls through
mass abductions of women and girls from religious
minorities, rape, killings, forced marriage, forced
prostitution and stoning. Such appalling practices have
made it our moral responsibility to immediately respond
by assisting efforts to bolster Iraq's efforts to protect
civilians. The sad reality is that much, much more has
to be done to reverse the catastrophic consequences of
those groups' continuing actions.

The Security Council has had an undeniable
role in raising awareness of the fact that women and
children are uniquely and disproportionately affected
by conflicts and their aftermath. The President's
concept note (S/2015/32, annex) rightly points out the
important role that the Security Council has played in
that regard. Significant progress has also been made in
the evolution of the international normative framework
on the protection of civilians. Furthermore, with every
passing year the consensus grows stronger around the
idea that while the primary protection of civilians lies
with States, it is also a legitimate and necessary focus
of collective action. But progress made at the normative
level makes sense only iftranslated into tangible action
on the ground. It is therefore important that we recall
the need for the Security Council to act swiftly and
resolutely in all situations affecting civilians.

On a final note, we would like to recognize that
there have been some important steps taken to provide
justice by making those responsible for human-rights
violations accountable. By creating the International
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda,
and referring the situations in Darfur and Libya to the
International Criminal Court, the Security Council
itself has provided important examples. We regret the
fact, however, that the Council has not been able to act
on Syria or, unfortunately, Ukraine. Civilians continue
to be targeted and killed today - now.

As the Council itself has acknowledged, it is equally
important to ensure humanitarian aid and funding by
providing a full range of medical, legal, psychological
and livelihood services to women affected by armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations. Sixteen years
after the end of the conflict in our neighbour Kosovo,
thousands offemale victims ofrape, many ofwhom were
helped to abort forced pregnancies, are still struggling
to properly address the trauma after the conflict. In
that context, the role of civil society and national and
international non-governmental organizations has
proved critical.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that the upcoming
twentieth anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre
and the tenth anniversary of the 2005 World Summit
offer an opportunity for all of us to renew and further
the commitment made at the Summit to protect
populations - women, girls, the elderly, boys and
men - from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. We must live up to that.

