Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for convening this debate
on women, the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict situations, which focuses on an important
aspect of the women, peace and security agenda.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
women, peace and security agenda has clearly advanced
in terms of scope and depth, and now occupies an
important place in the realm of legal instruments,
policies and specfic actions of the Organization
in defending the importance of including a gender
perspective in addressing the needs of women and
girls in all conflict situations, and particularly in post-
conflict reconstruction and recovery.

The natural synergy between participation and
protection is probably the central aspect of resolution
1325 (2000). The role of women in bringing peace
and security to conflict situations and their greater
participation in post-conflict processes and in
transitional justice is crucial to laying the groundwork
for sustainable peace. We welcome the progress
identified in the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/525), which reports on improvements in various
national justice systems and the existence of more
resources in international efforts, while recognizing
that there is still a need for the greater participation of
women in all mechanisms related to peace processes
and post-conflict reconstruction.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013)
today, which joins other efforts of the Security Council
to carry out a systematic follow up to the implementation
of the women, peace and security agenda and to move
towards the full participation of women in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding.

We value the efforts of UN WOMEN and the United
Nations Development Programme and their initiatives
to improve women's access to justice during and after
conflicts, as reflected in the report before us today. We
also value the critical role of civil society, particularly
that of local women's groups that assist victims in
various aspects of recovery, from health services to
access to justice.

We believe that full accountability is crucial and
requires a broad, multisectoral response that, apart from
medical and psychological aspects and reparations,
should also include a focus on social and economic
reintegration for victims.

The United Nations system must continue to fight
against the impunity of those responsible for such
violations and promote national capacity-building,
along with regional efforts, as well as international
justice mechanisms and the work of organizations that
defend women's human rights.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
important aspects of the women and peace and security
agenda. In recent years, such operations have gradually
incorporated protection-of-civilian mandates, with
special attention to women and girls. The progress
has been significant, but there are still limitations in
meeting the expectations of both local populations and
the international community.

In that context, we would like to point out that
Uruguay has been in the vanguard when it comes to
including women into the armed forces, as reflected
in the number of women deployed by the armed forces
and by the national police in Uruguayan contingents
to peacekeeping missions. Those professionals, always
acting as volunteers, have performed remarkably
and demonstrated significant levels of re-enlistment,
thereby illustrating their commitment to the goals
of the missions. That is why we would like to stress
the importance of continuing to promote greater
participation by women in the different areas and
functions that are linked to peace processes, as they
provide an undeniable qualitative contribution.

