Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this important meeting of the Security Council to
highlight one of the most serious challenges threatening
international peace and security. We also welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2104/ 181), which
provides important information that reflects the
enormous challenges impeding the global containment
of this scourge.

Sexual violence in conflict is a crime that has
harmed far too many people for thousands of years. It
knows no borders or age limitations and is not related
to any specific culture or ethnic group. This crime is
perpetrated without punishment and is used as a tactic
of war to destroy the fabric of society and deprive it of
the ability to heal and rebuild.

The United Arab Emirates expresses its grave
concern over the continued use and spread of this
heinous crime, which targets not only women and
girls, but also men and boys, and stresses the need to
develop an international response within the context of
the relevant Security Council resolutions on this issue.
While we strongly commend the notable efforts made
by Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
Team ofExperts Team ofExperts on the Rule ofLaw and
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the 13 United Nations
entities to build the resilience of countries to such
violence, we reiterate our support for the international
protocol, to be launched in the United Kingdom at the
forthcoming Global Summit to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict, on the documentation and investigation of
sexual Violence in conflict in a manner commensurate
with the practical measures that the United Kingdom has
taken to address this issue and which have received the
strong support of our Foreign Minister, His Highness
Sheikh Abdullah Bin Zayed Al Nahyan.

Today we have the political will and a clear
international framework which allows us to move from
simply condemning this crime to confronting it within
the framework of three main pillars.

First, legal deterrence has been actualized in
the establishment of the tribunals of Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, as well as the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
as a practical and first international step towards
strengthening global compliance with international
criminal law and preventing impunity for those who
commit criminal behaviour during conflict. We
therefore call for strengthening the jurisprudence of
criminal law as well as existing international legal
and judicial mechanisms, including the role played by
the International Criminal Court, to identify gaps and
develop a robust legal framework for preventing sexual
violence during conflict.

Secondly, national authorities must be strengthened
in the areas of legislation and security sector reform, to
ensure their ability to meet the requirements necessary
for preventing a culture of impunity and the promotion
of the culture of deterrence, accountability and
achieving justice and the rule of law. That should lead
to a perception of women as agents in the campaign
against sexual violence, not only as victims.

In that contex, we call for increasing the resources
and capacities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary- General to strengthen her mandate to provide
assistance and to build resilience, not only in countries
suffering from conflicts but also in neighbouring
countries and refugee camps to which conflict may
spread. We hope that the open meeting of the Security
Council to be held on Monday on security sector reform
will deliberate on this subject, and in particular on the
promulgation of military codes of conduct, including in
peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, there is a need to develop an international
mechanism for providing adequate protection and
support at all levels to the victims of this crime in order
to reintegrate them into their communities.
The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns
the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war in Syria,
and declares its support for all efforts being made to
collect data on these crimes in the pursuit ofjustice at
a later stage. We will continue to provide financial and
psychological support to affected Syrians in refugee
camps in order to guarantee their reintegration and
rehabilitation.

In conclusion, we will support all efforts and
initiatives undertaken to strengthen international
debates about this dangerous phenomenon and in finding
practical solutions for preventing the recurrence of this
crime. To achieve this purpose, we must innovate and
work across borders to extract the price of justice. The
United Arab Emirates is committed to playing a key
role in that important endeavour.

