Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): My
delegation welcomes today's debate as a timely
opportunity to review developments since the adoption
of the Security Council's landmark resolution 1325
(2000), of 31 October 2000. On this occasion, we
renew our commitment to the important roles that
women can play in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peace-building, as well as to
mainstreaming a gender perspective into all United
Nations activities in this area.

My delegation would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for giving
perspective to today's debate. My delegation would
also like to express its appreciation to Ms. Angela
King, Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser
on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, for her
tireless contributions on this subject. In particular, we
applaud her efforts in leading the study on women,
peace and security, as mandated by the resolution. We
also commend Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director
of the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), for the clarity and realism with which she
conveyed to us what resolution 1325 (2000) means to
women in the field and what it takes to put it into
action. We look forward to the publication of the
Secretary-General's report on this issue. We hope that
it will contain concrete recommendations for
expanding the role of women in conflict resolution, as
well as their participation in peacekeeping missions.

In many situations of armed conflict, women are
the most vulnerable and the most adversely affected.
They are also survivors, with a resourcefulness that
enables them to overcome enormous odds. A clear
understanding of their needs and of their participation
as key stakeholders in conflict resolution and in peace-
building should greatly increase the chances for long-
term, sustainable peace settlements. The starting point
is to see women as active agents of change, not merely
as victims or as vulnerable segments of a society.
Indeed, recent experiences of conflict resolution in
Afghanistan and in Sierra Leone provide evidence that
the peace effort is greatly strengthened by the active
participation of women in key roles.

My delegation believes that greater efforts need
to be directed towards gender mainstreaming in all
activities of the United Nations in the field of conflict
resolution and peacekeeping. Women should be
involved in far greater numbers in the ongoing
endeavours to promote peace, including through their
appointments as special representatives and special
envoys of the Secretary-General. Indeed, their serving
in such high-level United Nations positions would have
a positive impact on the role of women in conflict
situations.

We support the strengthening of women's
capacities to participate in United Nations
peacekeeping operations as well as in decision-making
at all levels. In this regard, we welcome the
establishment of gender units in the peacekeeping
missions, the most prominent example being the case
of East Timor. We also support the proposed
establishment of gender posts in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. If we are committed to
making gender mainstreaming an indispensable part of
the peace efforts in the field, it is only appropriate that
such efforts be backed up and coordinated by full-time
staff here at Headquarters.

In a conflict situation in which gender-based
violence is often utilized as a tool of intimidation and
war, the full force of international humanitarian and
human rights law should be brought to bear upon the
perpetrators. Past experience has taught us that without
accountability with respect to criminal responsibility,
the foundation of a durable and lasting peace will
remain shaky. Thus, my delegation applauds the
ongoing efforts to bring an end to the culture of
impunity, such as the listing of the crime of rape in the
statutes of the International Criminal Tribunals for the
Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, and of the
International Criminal Court, as establishing important
legal precedents. In this way, the international
community is sending a clear and powerful message
that gender-based violence will be prosecuted to the
fullest extent provided under the law.

In the same vein, there is a need to establish an
adequate system of reporting on gender-based violence,
exploitation and trafficking of women and girls, along
with enforcement, disciplinary and monitoring
mechanisms for peacekeeping missions. In this regard,
my delegation supports gender and peacekeeping
training in the field.
Finally, my delegation expresses its strong hope
that the Security Council will continue to provide
further momentum to according women equal and full
representation in matters of sustainable peace, security
and harmony around the world.

