Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset I am pleased to express our
appreciation to you for dedicating this open debate to the
women and peace and security agenda. I also welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716), as
well as the global study on the implementation of 1325
(2000).

My country accords special attention to gender
issues, as reflected in our actions leading to the adoption
and implementation of a number of plans and strategies,
including a women's strategy for the period 2003-2027,
a national strategy to combat violence against women,
a national policy to empower women, and a national
plan for the advancement of women. The Government
has also established a unit to combat violence against
women and an independent human rights commission,
in conformity with the Paris Principles. Women chair
both the unit and the commission.

The Government has focused its attention on
preventing violence against women, particularly in the
camps for internally displaced persons in Darfur, Blue
Nile and South Kordofan states, in cooperation with the
United Nations Population Fund and the human rights
division of the United Nations country team in my
country. The Government has directed the Prosecutor-
General for Darfur to investifate all alleged violations
committed since the eruption of the conflict in 2003,
particularly those relating to women and children.

Women have been basic partners in the
parliamentary and presidential elections in terms of
voting and preparation. They occupy 30 per cent of
the elected seats in Parliament. Women have held
the Vice-presidency and chaired a number of main
parliamentary committees. Since the early 1950s,
women have been guaranteed the vote and appointments
to Government posts. With regard to participation in
political life, women have run for the post of President.
Currently, they occupy important leadership positions,
including as advisers to the President, ministers at the
state and federal levels, leadership positions on women-
related issues and heads of other Government agencies.

In order to avert the dangers of human trafficking
to which women and children are subject, and given the
fact that the Sudan is a transit State through its outlying
desert, my Government has enacted a national law on
human trafficking, especially in relation to women
and children. In October, my capital hosted a regional
conference to combat human trafficking in the Horn
of Africa that was well attended by United Nations,
international and regional representatives, who adopted
and issued the Khartoum Declaration on the African
Union-Horn of Africa Initiative on Human Trafficking
and Smuggling ofMigrants. It is our hope that the United
Nations and the international community will assist in
the implementation of the Khartoum Declaration by
providing financial support to the States of the region.
My Government has also signed a number of treaties
concerning protection of its borders with neighbouring
States.

With regard to achieving economic empowerment,
the Government has established programmes to promote
rural women's development, including in the camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs). It has undertaken
projects aimed at women's economic empowerment,
such as a revolving fund and a career programme
for women. In the informal sector, it has established
microfunding projects, in view of the fact that men's
share of property and inheritance often exceeds that of
women.

Regarding the basic services, evidence and
indicators reveal that the number of girls enrolled in
higher education exceeds that of boys. Women have
access to health care services in cooperation with
the United Nations Population Fund and UNICEF;
consequently, maternal and child mortality rates have
declined.

We continue to make substantial efforts to deliver
assistance and basic services to IDPs affected by
conflict in Darfur, Blue Nile and South Kordofan states.
While there is not enough time to enumerate all such
assistance, those efforts have been fruitful. However,
they have also been hamprered by the intransigence of
rebel movements that continue to impede the delivery
of assistance to areas under their control.

My Government, in cooperation with neighbouring
States, is striving to promote the voluntary return of
its refugees and restore IDPs to their villages. In line
with resolution 1325 (2000), I call for the adoption of a
comprehensive approach to addressing issues of women
and peace and security, taking into consideration the
need to end conflict by prioritizing and assisting
reconstruction, the repatriation of IDPs and assistance
to affected States in addressing all matters related to
that important dossier.

All restrictions that continue to impede national
efforts, such as imposed deadlines and unilateral
sanctions, must be lifted. With regard to reporting, I
call for the need to verify the accuracy of information,
which must be shared with the Government of the
concerned State before it is incorporated into reports.

