The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his statement and for
presenting his report on women and peace and security
(S/2013/525). We are also grateful to the Under-
Secretary-General and Executive Director UN Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay;
and the board member of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Brigitte Balipou, for
their briefings.

We have proposed to focus our debate on women, the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations. In recent times, the Security Council has
paid increasing attention to the issue, acknowledging
that combating impunity, addressing past violations,
rebuilding the justice sector and asserting the principles
of the rule of law underpin efforts to build peace and
stability in the aftermath of conflict. However, less
attention has been paid to the gender consequences
of the breakdown of the rule of law during and after
conflict. While genuine gains have been made in
strengthening the political will and international legal
framework to secure justice and deal with conflict-
related sexual violence, little has been said of the full
range of violations and serious crimes experienced by
women, including enforced disappearances, foreign
occupation, mass forced displacement, restrictions on
humanitarian aid, conflict-related human trafficking
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure. There can
be no tolerance for such acts. Combating impunity and
strengthening both international and national justice
responses are critically important in that regard.

Governments bear the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians and for ensuring accountability
for conflict-related criminal offenses. In resolution
2122 (2013), adopted today, the Security Council once
again calls on Member States to comply with their
relevant obligations to end impunity and to thoroughly
investigate and prosecute persons responsible for
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
other serious violations of international humanitarian
law. At the same time, when national authorities fail
to take action, the international community should
play a more proactive role in ensuring an appropriate
response. Such measures and appropriate protection
and accountability efforts must obviously be free of
selectively and politically motivated approaches and
preferences. It is essential to address conflict-related
violations and abuses of human rights through all
available means, including, inter alia, by mandating
international commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions, as well as by supporting the implementation
of the recommendations of those bodies and missions.

As we have stated on a number ofoccasions, wrongs
that have been left unpunished or unrecognized may
impede progress in achieving long-awaited peace and
reconciliation. Such wrongs can also play a key role in
the eruption ofnew conflicts and the commission ofnew
crimes. Our consistent focus on that particular aspect
of the problem is based on my country's experience in
addressing the tragic humanitarian consequences of
the war unleashed against it, including mass atrocities
committed by adverse armed forces, forced population
displacement in Azerbaijan and the continuing military
occupation of its territories.

It is important that the Security Council, Member
States and regional organizations ensure that mediators
and envoys in mediation, peace and preventive
diplomacy process can contribute to ensuring
accountability, including by encouraging the parties
concerned to envisage transitional justice clauses
in peace agreements. Those responsible for serious
crimes committed during conflicts, including gender-
based Violence, must be excluded from all branches of
Government, and the principle of no amnesty or any
other form of indulgence for the perpetrators of such
offenses must be applied. Such measures should be
implemented comprehensively and should also envisage
the full rights of victims to redress.

In resolution 2122 (2013), the Council recalls
applicable provisions of international law on the right
to reparations for violations of individual rights. It is
essential that reparations programmes receive increased
recognition and support as a tool for delivering justice
and redress for victims and longer-term peace dividends
within societies and communities. The contribution
of transitional justice measures to rebuilding the
rule of law, redress, justice and reconciliation makes
such measures equally important tools for furthering
women's rights in post-conflict societies.

To conclude, I would like once again to thank
all briefers for their contribution to our debate and
reiterate my country's full support for more systematic
and frequent discussions of the topic.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Before giving the floor to the next speaker, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I wish to inform all
concerned that we will be continuing this open debate
right through the lunch hour, as we have a very large
number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

