Ms. Juul (Norway): I am making this statement on
behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country Norway. I thank Germany for organizing
today's open debate on this critical topic.

With the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) today,
it is essential to advance the agenda of conflict-related
sexual violence by focusing on the survivors. Let us
emphasize that the survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence deserve basic sexual and reproductive health
and rights. We regret that sexual and reproductive
health and rights, as reaffirmed by the Security Council
in several ofits resolutions, most recently in resolutions
1889 (2009) and 2106 (2013), were not included.

Nadia Murad and Denis Mukwege bring with them
the voices of the very people we are here to serve and
whose communities the Security Council is meant to
safeguard. As we acknowledge once again that the
devastating harm that those women, girls, men and
boys have been exposed to is a matter of national
and international security, they are here to hold
us accountable.

Girls become mothers and children become
stateless. Women are raped and their husbands are
forced to watch. Reproductive organs are mutilated and
shame and stigma paralyse families and villages. Those
injuries of war call for a comprehensive response.
Sexual violence destroys lives, tears apart the social
fabric of communities, creates rifts between neighbours
and preys on the differences that enrich our societies.
Those who are targeted are often discriminated against
due to their religious, ethnic, sexual, political or other
minority status.

It has been ten years now since the mandate of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
was established. Ms. Wallstrom, Ms. Bangura and
Ms. Patten have done an excellentjob, not least through
United Nations Action and the Team of Experts; yet, in
many conflicts, abuse is still widespread. We welcome
the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/280), which
indicates possible ways forward.

We must monitor and document Violations of
international law and provide training and funding,
where needed. We need to strengthen State institutions
and build our capacity to combat conflict-related
sexual Violence. Individual States have the primary
responsibility of preventing and responding to sexual
violence, as well as investigating and prosecuting
persons implicated in such crimes. Perpetrators of
conflict-related sexual violence must be held to account.

We call for the systematic use ofgender expertise in
United Nations operations. We welcome the dedicated
specialized teams, the new policy and the soon-to-
be-launched all-of-mission handbook on the prevention
of, and response to, conflict-related sexual violence. We
echo the need for resolutions, mandates and sanctions
to address conflict-related sexual violence.

Root causes of gender-based violence, such as
gender-based power inequalities and gender-based
discrimination, must be addressed. Responsive
measures, such as providing adequate services to the
survivors of gender-based violence, are crucial, as
are measures to prevent the violence from happening
in the first place. We support the call to action to end
sexual violence in conflict. We rely on survivors and
witnesses, civil society and human rights defenders
as we strive to build a relevant and effective response
without causing survivors further pain.

Reparation and justice must go hand in hand. A
comprehensive approach is a prerequisite to alleviate
both the immediate and long-term impacts of conflict-
related sexual violence. We must strengthen services
for survivors of sexual violence, including by ensuring
comprehensive sexual and reproductive health rights,
such as access to emergency contraception and the safe
termination of pregnancies. We must fight impunity,
remove stigma, alleviate suffering, rectify injustices
and, ultimately, help people to rebuild their lives and
help communities to build peace. In that context,
we emphasize the significant progress made by the
International Criminal Court and its Trust Fund for
Victims in combating conflict-related sexual violence.

The Nordic countries will do our part through our
embassies, multilateral efforts and many partnerships.
The Nordic Women Mediators network calls for
more gender-transformative peace and reconciliation
processes. The Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations equips peacekeepers. We deploy many
women and men who champion that cause. This
anniversary year demands action.

Norway, together with Somalia, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Population Fund, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other partners, will host a
conference in Oslo on 23 and 24 May. The objectives
are to mobilize more political awareness and financial
support to address conflict-related sexual violence
in humanitarian crises and highlight best practices
to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based
violence in humanitarian situations.

