Mr. Rock (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the opportunity to speak on this important
subject. This debate demonstrates how seriously the
United Nations and its Member States take the issue of
sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. While we consider primary
consideration of the issue should remain with the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, where
it most is appropriately carried out, we agree that the
Security Council should be seized of this issue, and in
that regard we welcome today's debate.

Sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
missions is among the most appalling forms of breach
of trust. It diminishes us all. It undermines the United
Nations as an institution. It causes incalculable harm to
some of the most vulnerable people in the world. And
although these crimes are committed by a small
number of individuals, their abuse taints the loyal and
professional service of our valiant United Nations
peacekeepers, who daily put their lives at risk for
others.

(spoke in English)

Over the past year, the Secretary-General and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) have
made considerable efforts to ensure that progress is
made on the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Canada
strongly supports the measures taken by the Secretary-
General to implement a policy of zero tolerance for
sexual and gender-based violence.

Significant steps have now been taken to bring
alleged abusers to account. As of October 2005, more
than 221 suspects from among peacekeeping forces had
been investigated, 10 civilians had been fired and more
than 88 uniformed personnel had been repatriated. The
establishment of conduct and discipline units in some
peacekeeping missions and at United Nations
Headquarters is a very positive development. But the
policy and the measures taken by the Secretary-
General will succeed only if we, as Member States,
take appropriate steps to ensure that our personnel
deployed on peace operations are appropriately trained
and are held to the highest standards of conduct and
discipline. We look forward to the day when troop-
contributing countries incorporate training on sexual
exploitation and abuse in their pre-deployment training
programmes.

We welcome the excellent and comprehensive
report (A/59/710) delivered by our colleague the
Permanent Representative of Jordan, Prince Zeid, a
report that is a tangible demonstration of the desire of
the United Nations to proactively follow through on
the Secretary-General's commitment on this very issue.
As a follow-up to Prince Zeid's report, DPKO has
proposed a number of measures, including in
particular: the requirement that public information
campaigns be undertaken to combat the culture of
acceptance which has developed in peacekeeping
missions; and the furnishing of support to the
empowerment of local women and girls. That latter
recommendation is critical if those women and girls
are to be in a position to protect themselves from
sexual exploitation and to seek redress when it occurs.

As Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno
stated this past October during the Council's open debate
on resolution 1325 (2000),

"Beyond pointing to a series of systemic
weaknesses that account for such gross misconduct,
[the] problem [of sexual exploitation and abuse]
should be a wake-up call for all of us to attach even
more importance to incorporating a gender
perspective into our work". (S/PV.5294, p. 5)

Canada would add that we must also closely
examine how we can collectively agree on further
implementation mechanisms - which may take a little
longer to fully develop - and on how best we can
support them. We strongly support the continued work
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
on this important issue at its upcoming session. We
encourage the Committee to support the initiative of
national investigation officers put forward by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS),
including the methodology for strong, direct and
transparent action, while ensuring that national judicial
processes are respected. We believe that it is
imperative that early advice be given to a Member

State when an allegation has been made against one or
more of its personnel so that swift and effective action
can be taken to investigate the allegation and to punish
those convicted of these crimes. We are confident that
the Special Committee will provide further options to
implement the Secretary-General's policy and Prince
Zeid's insightful report.

For our part, Canada will ensure that the military,
police and civilian personnel sent by our Government
on United Nations missions are well trained,
professional and fully aware of their responsibilities
and of the codes of conduct. We know that all countries
represented in this Chamber share the same objective:
to eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We will achieve that
goal only if all troop-contributing countries ensure that
the highest training standards are followed.

We have heard time and time again of the so-
called wall of silence with which Prince Zeid and his
team have been met when broaching the topic of sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping missions. This
wall of silence has kept many abuse cases from being
investigated. The work of the Secretary-General, the
work of DPKO, the recommendations of OIOS, the
work of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping and
the endeavours of troop-contributing countries over the
past year have shown that, when we are mobilized,
change can take place. That change must continue,
because sexual and gender-based violence continues to
threaten women's human rights and sustainable peace
and security. Our rapid and effective action has never
been more critically needed.

Let us therefore commit ourselves anew to
vigorous and focused action, so that we can protect
those in vulnerable situations from abuse and
exploitation and restore the reputation of the United
Nations, and of all who represent it, for integrity and
for honourable behaviour.
