Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of October,
and to thank you for convening this meeting so early in
your presidency. There has recently been noteworthy
positive momentum in this Chamber concerning the
rights of women, and it is my hope that we can benefit
from that momentum here today.

Worldwide, women start at a disadvantage. In
some countries, this means wage discrepancies and
debates over harassment in the workplace. But in
conflict and post-conflict situations, the substantial ills
facing societies concerned are magnified with regard to
women. When a society is poor, proportionally more
women go hungry. When education or health care is
lacking, women and girls are the first to be deprived.
And when a nation faces substantial insecurity, women
find themselves more vulnerable, more restricted and
more cut off from necessary resources.

The situation of women in Afghanistan became
an issue of wider international interest when the
Taliban first began enforcing its brutal, misogynistic
social policies and Afghan women became hunted
people in their own homeland. Thus, when the Taliban
was toppled in 2001, it was seen at least partially as the
stroke that freed Afghan women from their chains.
Afghanistan and the international community made a
promise to each other that what happened under the
Taliban would never happen again. More importantly,
we made the same promise to the women of
Afghanistan.

Over the past eight years, we have kept those
promises to the best of our ability. The Afghan
Constitution guarantees equal rights to women and
representation in the Government. Afghanistan has
endorsed the Millennium Development Goals, is a
signatory to the Beijing Platform for Action and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, fully supports the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), and has put in place a legal and political
framework that protects and promotes the rights of
women. Beyond these legal initiatives, Afghan women
have seen tangible improvements in their daily lives,
including improved access to education, health care
and basic infrastructure. Afghanistan's national action
plan for women ensures that women and girls receive
equal access to these resources.

Further, and perhaps most importantly, Afghan
women now play an active role in the socio-political
life of Afghanistan. Women have been appointed to
high governmental posts and comprise a guaranteed
percentage of representation in local and national
governing bodies alike. In the most recent election,
women ran for positions in provincial councils in
greater numbers than ever before, and there were even
two female candidates for President. More than 60,000
women were trained and volunteered as observers, poll
workers and ballot counters. And, despite the
increasingly turbulent security situation, more than
2 million women across the country came out to vote.

Despite these positive developments, Afghan
women do not enjoy the freedom and security they
deserve. In order to fully satisfy our promise to the
women of Afghanistan, we need to understand the roots
of the problems as well as the situations today that
frustrate our efforts.

First, enduring insecurity has always played a
central role in women's suffering in Afghanistan. In the
past, insecurity caused a complete breakdown in
infrastructure and resources, resulting in backbreaking
poverty and lack of access to health care and basic
education. Today, restricted access to the most insecure
parts of the country perpetuates this situation and
hinders progress. The Taliban is increasingly targeting
civilians, particularly women and girls, to deny them
access to basic services and rights. In addition,
insecurity promotes a gun culture that values brute
force over the rule of law. The resulting danger keeps
women confined to their homes out of fear for their
safety and honour, further restricting their access to
services and public life.

Secondly, extremist ideologies of oppression have
primarily threatened women over the past 30 years.
Throughout the 1990s, the Taliban and other armed
groups engaged in severe violence against women.
Crimes against women, including sexual violence and
forced marriage, were justified and protected by
extremists. Unfortunately, as long as insecurity and
extremism persist, Afghanistan cannot be freed from
this perversion of perspective and action regarding
women.

In addition to those root causes, weak and fragile
State institutions in parts of Afghanistan have,
regrettably, restricted the Government's ability to fully
protect the rights of women. An infant justice system
and police force do not yet have the training or the
resources to adequately investigate, prosecute and
punish crimes. And our underdeveloped bureaucracy
has not yet acquired the capacities necessary to meet
the demands placed upon it. In Afghanistan, there is
not a lack of will for progress, but circumstances have
proved to be a formidable opponent to its achievement.

Despite these continuing challenges, Afghanistan
is committed to ensuring that all women fully enjoy
their rights in safety. With the help and support of the
international community, we are addressing weak and
insufficient governance through capacity-building and
the strengthening of our institutions and our security
apparatus. In that regard, we emphasize the importance
of the new focus of the international forces on
protecting the population, which will help to minimize
violence against women. Further, we are continually
trying to improve the legal status of Afghan women
and to uphold international juridical and legislative
standards, for example through the review of more than
60 of the more controversial articles of the proposed
Shia family relations law.

The Government of Afghanistan is committed to
representing the interests of all Afghans, male and
female, young and old. We are encouraging Afghan
women to take a proactive and vocal role in their
future, as that is essential to re-weaving the economic,
social and political fabric of Afghanistan. Above all, in
our political pursuit of national reconciliation, we must
not break the promise that we made to ourselves and to
Afghan women in 2001. We cannot betray women's
rights and security in exchange for a shallow peace in
Afghanistan, because, in doing so, we would betray our
own hope for a stable future. Instead, we must unite
around the ideal of equal justice and rights for all.

