Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, I would like to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today's open debate to recognize the importance of
women's participation in peacekeeping. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers for their updates
and valuable insights.

It has become evident that the participation of
women increases the effectiveness, stability and
efficiency of peace missions. Women make an
inimitable contribution to peacekeeping by winning
the hearts and minds of the community they are
deployed to serve. They have easier access to local
women, which can help reduce gender-based violence.
That, in turn, helps in the protection of civilians in
general. Additionally, women in peacekeeping provide
direct positive motivation to the local community
to embrace women's empowerment, girls' education
and gender equality. Studies have shown that female
peacekeepers are highly effective in de-escalating local
tensions and building trust with the local communities.
Needless to say, women's participation helps prevent
and combat sexual exploitation and abuse. All those
positive ramifications eventually help in the effective
implementation of a mission's mandate. Therefore,
we must ensure women's active involvement in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes.

I wish to share my country's experiences. Through
its own experience of the successful home-grown peace
process, Nepal underscores that women's increased role
in the national context greatly complements the United
Nations aspiration for a greater role for women at the
global level. In 2011, Nepal adopted its first five-year
national action plan to implement resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008). Nepal was the first country
in South Asia, and the second in Asia overall, to
establish such a plan. As of now, the second national
plan has been drafted and builds on the experience and
lessons learned from the first phase of implementation.
Necessary legal arrangements have been made to
encourage the recruitment of women in Nepal's security
forces. Moreover, 33 per cent of positions under the
reserved quota are allotted for women in all public-
sector jobs. Nepal is committed to ensuring women's
participation in peacekeeping. We have already met
United Nations targets in terms of the participation of
female peacekeepers as staffofficers, military observers
and individual police officers. My country also began
integrating female engagement teams made up of from
30 to 35 female peacekeepers in infantry battalions
2017. Currently, Nepal is the fourth-largest contributor
of female peacekeepers. Let me also reiterate Nepal's
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.

I would like to make the following points to
enhance the participation of women in peacekeeping.
Troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCS)
should be supported in terms of their capacity-building,
with special emphasis on the deployment of female
peacekeepers. In that regard, I acknowledge the efforts
of Canada and the United Nations through the Elsie
Initiative. I encourage Member States to support it or
initiate similar funds to support TCCs and PCCs. Nepal
also welcomes Germany's announcement that it will
establish a female peacekeepers network. Secondly,
the safety, security and dignity of female peacekeepers
should be adequately ensured. Thirdly, there should
be an encouraging working environment and shorter
deployment periods for female peacekeepers. Lastly,
meaningful partnership with civil society and regional
organizations and local communities should be ensured
to incorporate gender perspectives in peace operations.

In conclusion, I would like pay tribute to those
brave women who work day and night in peace missions
to make this world a safer and better place.

