Mr. Machado (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his remarks. We are grateful to Special
Representative Zainab Bangura for her presentation.
My delegation also thanks Ms. Jane Adong Anywar and
Ms. Angelina Jolie for their participation.

Sexual violence is probably one of the most
shameful facets of armed conflict. Despite the progress
achieved since the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008),
the deliberate use of sexual violence as a tactic ofwar is
still widespread. Effectively addressing the remaining
challenges requires combining prevention, justice and
support to victims.

As with any other type of violence against
civilians, conflict prevention is the best way to ensure
the protection of women and girls. First and foremost,
parties and the international community, especially the
Council, must actively seek to prevent conflict from
arising and, if conflict emerges, resolutely commit to
settling their differences by peaceful means. This is
an ethical imperative and an objective international
obligation under the Charter.

The effective prevention of sexual violence in
armed conflict also requires the strengthening of
national institutions and capabilities so that States can
lead in designing and implementing comprehensive
domestic strategies in this domain. The international
community's duty is to provide adequate support to
local authorities, when requested, and cooperate with
national efforts in areas such as awareness-raising,
education campaigns, reconciliation and early-warning
systems.

Furthermore, through peacekeeping operations and
special political missions, the United Nations can play
an important preventive role. To that end, Member States
must ensure that sufficient resources are allocated to
activities in this area in the United Nations budget. We
must also adequately train our peacekeepers in women,
peace and security issues. The Secretariat and missions
throughout the world must continue to improve
prevention tools. In this regard, Brazil is pleased at
the progress made on the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements.

In our prevention efforts, the interlinkage between
security, development and sustainable peace must not
be overlooked. Prevention can greatly benefit from
women's empowerment and gender equality, which in
many cases depend on social inclusion and economic
opportunity. Adequately responding to the needs of
women in areas such as education, employment and
health services helps create favourable preconditions
for their long-term protection.

The consistent prosecution of sexual crimes is
a strong deterrent to future incidents. The United
Nations is in a unique position to cooperate with
national authorities, as appropriate, in strengthening
national justice systems. Brazil welcomes the work of
Ms. Bangura's office in this area, as well as the valuable
role that the United Nations Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict can play.

National Governments should also focus on seeking
to improve services for victims. Authorities and
societies must be ready to provide the critical health,
psychosocial, legal and other support needed by women
and girls who have been subject to the horrors of sexual
Violence in conflict situations.

Brazil is seeking to do its part. Our Ministry of
Defence has signed a letter of intent with UN-Women
to deepen our cooperation regarding the training of
peacekeepers on gender issues and the promotion of
South-South cooperation on this subject. In Haiti,
we have been helping to build local capacity to deal
with victims of gender-based violence in areas such as
health, justice and security. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, more than 400 victims of sexual violence
have benefited from the Brazilian contribution to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The international community must continue
to work together to translate the increasing global
awareness of the scourge of sexual violence in conflict
into actual improvement of the security of women in
armed conflict. Brazil remains committed to this cause.

