Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Let me first
express appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Marie Guehenno and His Royal Highness Prince Zeid
Al-Hussein, Permanent Representative of Jordan and
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, for their
eloquent and comprehensive briefings.

Peacekeeping operations are, undoubtedly, the
most tangible testimony of United Nations actions in
fulfilling one of its important responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Having brought succour and hope to the deprived
victims of conflict, the distinguished service of the
blue helmets over the years has been widely acclaimed.
Regrettably, this enviable pedigree has been sullied,
albeit partially, by recent dishonourable conduct, in
particular, sexual exploitation and abuse, perpetrated
by a few misguided and undisciplined individuals.

The overwhelming condemnation of such grave
human rights abuses by the international community
and the prompt remedial action initiated by the
Secretary-General, supported by Member States, has
helped to redeem the credibility of the Organization.

My delegation is encouraged by the continuing
seriousness with which the United Nations is trying to
stem this menace completely, especially the role of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services, which between
1 January 2004 and 9 December 2005 has investigated
278 alleged sexual exploitation and abuse cases. The
creation of the conduct and discipline teams to, among
other things, monitor cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse and their resolution is another worthwhile
initiative. So far, the teams are operating in eight
missions. These measures and others are a true
reflection of the Organization's avowed determination
to ensure the realization of this oft-repeated slogan of
zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. The
relentless efforts by troop-contributing countries
towards the attainment of this goal cannot be ignored.

Although we may assume that some progress has
been made, an objective assessment of these measures
can only be made if data is provided on reported cases
prior to their implementation and during the period
thereafter. We, therefore, call on the Secretariat to
apprise Member States of the requisite statistics to
facilitate a thorough review. In any case, it is the
expectation of my delegation that any such report will
indicate a decrease in such malfeasance. Our optimism
is premised on the fact that even an increase in
reported cases could be positively reviewed and
attributed to the creation of awareness, which has
contributed to the lifting of the veil of silence that has
existed up to now.

Again, while welcoming the initial stationing of
the teams in eight missions, it is also pertinent to
ascertain the factors that informed that decision. We
hope that efforts will be made to cover the remaining
10 missions, since undue delay in that regard will be
misconstrued and lead to criticism of selectivity.

It is the candid view of my delegation that the
quest for a comprehensive solution to the abuses could
be enhanced by the provision of welfare and
recreational facilities for troops. Having charged this
responsibility to troop-contributing countries, it
behoves the Secretariat to ensure prompt
reimbursement to those participating in peacekeeping
operations so as to enable them to pay for the
construction of such facilities.

Closely related to sexual exploitation and abuse
is the wider issue of women, peace and development
and the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). In this regard, the effective utilization of
available gender expertise would assist tremendously
in gaining a better understanding of the societies and
people to whom the peace processes are extending
needed help. The total implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) is, therefore, imperative.

In conclusion, Ghana, as a major troop-
contributing country, unreservedly supports measures
to eradicate the grave violation of human rights
through sexual exploitation and abuse, since the hard-
won honour of troop-contributing countries should not
be tarnished by the misconduct of a few.

