Mr. Adom (Cote D'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation commends the Bolivian presidency for
organizing this debate on the role of women in the
promotion of peace and security. I would also like to
thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah for their very informative briefings,
which reinforced our conviction that it is essential
to step up our support for women's contributions to
conflict prevention and resolution.

In that regard, I welcome the leadership of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Antonio
Guterres, whose report (S/2018/900) provides an
encouraging assessment of the efforts undertaken to
date by the international community and, at the same
time, calls for continued efforts to place women at the
centre of strategies to restore peace and stability.

The statement I am making now on behalf of the
three African countries that are members of the Security
Council - Cote d'Ivoire, Ethiopia and Equatorial
Guinea - is intended to showcase our common
commitment to promoting the role of women in conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and economic development,
in the light of the strategic priorities identified by the
African Union.

At this stage, allow me to express heartfelt and
respectful congratulations to Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed and the people ofEthiopia, who havejust elected
a women to the presidency, our colleague and friend
Her Excellency Ambassador Sahle-Work Zewde, and
a Government that is characterized by perfect parity
between men and women. That is an example to follow.
It is also testimony that women's leadership is becoming
increasingly necessary and decisive in the harmonious
conduct of world affairs. And as Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, said, it
is important to ensure that gender equality in politics is
respected. Allow me also to recognize President Paul
Kagame, President of Rwanda, and his Government for
spearheading efforts to that end.

The briefing delivered by the Executive Director
of UN-Women provided an overview of the status
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), 18
years after its adoption by the Security Council. That
resolution carries a fundamental message that is more
relevant than ever, namely, that the participatory role of
women is crucial and even decisive in peace processes
and policies to strengthen the security of our States.

Today there is general consensus that restoring
sustainable peace and stability in a post-crisis context,
for example, requires the active participation of women
in the political processes of crisis resolution and
peacebuilding. The recognition of that fundamental
requirement, enshrined in resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as in the subsequent resolutions 1889 (2009), 2122
(2013) and 2242 (2015), underlines women's leadership
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding by sufficiently
showing the international community's resolute
commitment to translate that into concrete action.

As an institution that speaks on behalf of a
continent where challenges persist with regard to the
inclusion of women in peace processes, the African
Union fully subscribes to that commitment. To that
end, our common efforts must converge towards the
implementation of those multilateral commitments, by
further opening up political spaces and peace processes
to women and by strengthening their role as actors in
economic and social development.

This debate provides us with an opportunity to
deliver two messages.

First, we affirm the African Union's unequivocal
commitment to working to strengthen the role of women
in peace and security processes. The main objective
at the continental level with regard to the women
and peace and security agenda is to obtain tangible
results through the operationalization of the relevant
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) contained in the
national action plans. Promoting gender equality in the
executive and legislative systems and strengthening
of the role of women in mediation and prevention
strategies were identified as priorities, which must
now be diligently implemented in close collaboration
with the United Nations and other bilateral partners,
including FemWise-Africa and the African Women
Leaders Network.

Those platforms ensure, it should be stressed, the
effective implementation of commitments made to
include women in the restoration of peace, stability
and sustainable development. In addition to those
platforms, in March, the African Union adopted the
Continental Results Framework for Monitoring and
Reporting on the Implementation of the Women,
Peace and Security Agenda in Africa, which enables
the collection of quantitative and qualitative data on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Continental Framework promotes the development and
refinement of evidence-based policies that reflect the
reality of women on the ground.

Secondly, we are deeply convinced that the quest
for peace and security in Africa is inextricably linked
to the unwavering struggle against unacceptable acts
of violence suffered by women that constrain their
economic empowerment. In that regard, I recall the
African Union's adherence to a zero-tolerance policy
with regard to sexual violence linked to conflicts
and peacekeeping missions. Accordingly, mediators,
as well as support systems that include a gender
perspective and women's participation, have been
deployed in peace-enforcement missions in Somalia
and Darfur. The African Union and its member States
have established several programmes that integrate
peacebuilding and economic empowerment initiatives
for the benefit of the women of the continent.

In conclusion, I reiterate our commitment to the
vision of the women and peace and security agenda,
which is a top priority in Agenda 2063 of the African
Union, the African Peace and Security Architecture
and the African Governance Architecture. The
African Union will continue to strengthen its strategic
partnership with the United Nations through increased,
robust cooperation between its Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council in confronting the
most urgent challenges together. The contribution
of women to promoting peace and development, the
struggle against the devastation wrought by firearms
with the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative of the
African Union and financial support for African
peacekeeping operations, among other things, will play
a prominent role in that undertaking.

