Ms. Bangura: I wish to thank the Government of
Jordan for hosting this open debate, which comes at a
crucial moment of consolidation for this agenda, as well
as the Council for the priority it has given this issue for
several years.

I am grateful that my sister Hamsatu Allamin is
able to join us today, giving voice to civil society, which
represents a moral compass for this mandate. I also
wish to acknowledge the presence of Vian DakhiI of the
Yazidi community and Member of Parliament in Iraq.
I am glad that she will speak on behalf of her country
at this debate.

It has been three years since I assumed my role as
the Secretary-General's Special Representative, and
I could hardly have imagined how heartbreaking this
mission would be. The horrors suffered by the women,
children and men whom I have encountered reaffirm
my absolute conviction that sexual Violence in conflict
represents a great moral issue of our time and merits the
concerted focus of the Security Council. This crime, in
its destruction of the individual and the pervasive way
it undermines the prospects for peace and development,
casts a long shadow over our collective humanity.

However, five years after the creation of the mandate,
I believe that we find ourselves at a new juncture, with
a possibility to turn back the tide of these atrocities. We
have an opportunity to change, irrevocably, not only the
way in which this crime is perceived and understood,
but also, crucially, the manner in which we respond to
it in our security and justice sectors, and in terms of
services for survivors.

We are beginning to see some tangible and positive
changes on the ground, which should convince us that
our fight to eradicate sexual Violence in conflict is not
a "mission impossible". We have a solid normative

foundation and increasingly precise tools to drive this
agenda on the ground. Our knowledge, analysis and
information are deeper and serve as a basis for strategic
interventions at all levels. Greater resources are
being dedicated to sexual and gender-based Violence
programming on the ground than ever before, although
the resources still fall far short of the challenges we
face.

We are finally beginning to see some accountability
for a crime that has historically been largely cost-free
to commit. This is exemplified by important legislative
reforms, the criminalization of rape at national level, and
an increase in national and international prosecutions.
National authorities in some key situations of concern
are beginning to take ownership and exhibit the
leadership required to address conflict-related sexual
Violence in a purposeful and sustainable manner. This
includes structured commitments undertaken at the
highest levels of Government, and the adoption of
specific plans of action by national security institutions.

Over the past three years, we have witnessed a
significant increase in the number of peace agreements
and ceasefire frameworks that explicitly reflect conflict-
related sexual Violence concerns, which is crucial
to ensuring that survivors have services and redress
in the aftermath of conflict and that perpetrators are
excluded from power and held to account. The notion of
reparations for survivors is also beginning to take root,
and we are seeing some examples of transformative
reparations programmes coming on-line, and some
survivors receiving reparations. However, we still have
a long road ahead to ensure that women have consistent
and timely redress, including the necessary livelihood
support to enable them to pick up the pieces of their
lives.

This year's report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/203), which I am honoured to present,
highlights shocking incidents of sexual violence in 19
situations of concern, as well as some of these positive
developments. The interagency network United Nations
Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict, which I
Chair, continues to be the primary consultation forum
for the report, and the depth of information and analysis
this year represents an important marker of progress
in itself. I would like to note that women protection
advisers, where they are deployed, have contributed
significantly to deepening the information base for
the report. I am pleased that two of our senior women
protection advisers, currently serving in Mali and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, are here today and
will have the chance to interact directly with Council
delegations and concerned Member States this week.

The text before the Council serves not only
as an annual report of record, but also as a global
advocacy instrument and vehicle for refining our
common understanding of critical themes to enhance
coordination and build global consensus. This year's
report raises a number of themes and brings to light
new dimensions of this issue. There is a focus on sexual
Violence as a threat used to induce displacement and
as a risk faced by civilians, particularly women and
girls, in displacement settings. It is linked to forced
dispossession of land and property, which denies
women vital sources of livelihood. It highlights the
vulnerability and targeting of ethnic and religious
minorities, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex individuals by armed groups, to impose
morality and exert social control.

Forced marriage, which entails repeated sexual
abuse and increases in times of conflict, features
prominently throughout the report. It touches on
the role of community, faith-based leaders and local
journalists in addressing harmful social norms, and
helping to redirect the stigma of rape from the victims
to the perpetrators. The report emphasizes throughout
the narrative the necessity of addressing this issue in
ceasefire and mediation processes as an integral part of
our response to sexual Violence, preventing relapse into
conflict and fostering a durable, inclusive peace.

Tomorrow, I will depart for my first visit to the
Middle East, on a mission that will take me to Syria and
Iraq, as well as to the neighboring countries of Jordan,
Lebanon and Turkey, which continue to bear the weight
of massive flows of refugees fleeing conflict. The Visit
is undertaken against the backdrop of a catastrophic
new trend in the use of sexual violence as a tactic of
terror by extremist groups, not only in Iraq and Syria,
but also in Somalia, Nigeria and Mali.

The Secretary-General's report, for the first time,
articulates how sexual violence is integrally linked to the
strategic objectives, ideology and funding of extremist
groups, and notes therefore that women's empowerment
and sexual violence prevention should be central to
the international response. This represents a critical
new challenge for the conflict-related sexual Violence
agenda. I would like to underscore the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Al-Qaida/Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant sanctions committee
includes sexual Violence as part of its designation
criteria, and begins to focus on sexual violence as a
tactic of terrorism. But ultimately, an effective counter-
strategy must include intensive community-level
engagement, including with women and civil society,
youth groups, and traditional and faith-based leaders.

It should be noted that, of the 45 parties listed in
the annex of this year's report, the vast majority are
non-State actors. Therefore, we will have to consider
the political and operational challenges that lie ahead
in terms of engaging with some of these parties, for
concrete and time-bound commitments in line with
resolution 2106 (2013). My Office has begun to explore
engagement with a number of non-State actors, and I
look forward to the opportunity to brief the Council
in the future on progress and challenges in this crucial
area.

Since the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), we
have been able to successfully frame this issue as a
peace and security concern that requires an operational
security response. I believe that more focused
engagement of security sector actors will help to turn
the tide on this crime. It will require us to articulate
more precisely the role that security sector actors can
play and to transform military cultures to enhance
protection and prevention.

Over the past two years, we have signed
frameworks of cooperation with the African Union
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, and are now moving along similar lines with
the League of Arab States. At the same time, a number
of regional organizations, including the AU and NATO,
have appointed special representatives and envoys
on women, peace and security. This represents an
important expansion of the circle of stakeholders, and
challenges us to ensure coordination and coherence in
our collective action.

Since I assumed my role, one of my key objectives
for the mandate has been to foster national ownership,
leadership and responsibility. I am encouraged that,
since 2012, the Governments of Angola, Guinea, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Somalia and South Sudan have signed
joint communiques with the United Nations, outlining
priority areas of intervention to address sexual
violence. These commitments have been undertaken at
the highest levels of Government and are the basis for
implementation plans that are now being developed by
national authorities, in concert with the United Nations
and other partners.

The United Nations Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict has
been instrumental in supporting national authorities
to catalyse implementation through technical and
institutional capacity-strenghthening. The role of
United Nations Action is also crucial, particularly in
supporting the development and implementation of
comprehensive national strategies to combat sexual
violence and deliver multisectoral services to survivors.
It is essential that both the Team of Experts and United
Nations Action receive the financial support necessary
to sustain those efforts.

Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7l60), I have undertaken follow-up missions to the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and Visited South Sudan and Colombia
for the first time. I intend to continue the intensive
engagement of the mandate in situations of concern so
as to turn the resolutions of the Council into solutions
on the ground.

Progress at the national level is crucial and indicates
that addressing conflict-related sexual violence is
possible even under challenging circumstances. It is
essential that both the Team of Experts and UN Action
receive the necessary financial support to sustain these
efforts.

I believe that the modest progress that we are
beginning to witness should be an encouragement to
all of us to stay the course and reinforce our efforts.
At the same time, the catastrophic circumstances and
the acute vulnerability of so many women, children and
men to sexual violence in conflict situations around the
world must now crystallize our resolve into clear action
to prevent those crimes and to care for survivors.

It is essential that we translate promises into
practice. As the report states, the era of silence has been
replaced by international recognition that the shame of
rape resides not in the victims but in the perpetrators,
and in any party that seeks to condone or conceal their
conduct.

The history of war-zone rape has been a history
of denial. It is time to bring these crimes, and those
who commit them, into the spotlight of international
scrutiny and to send a clear message that the world will
not tolerate the use of sexual Violence as a tactic of war
and terror.

