Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): When Namibia, during
its presidency of the Security Council in October 2000,
decided to place the issue of women, peace and
security on the Council's agenda, it was well aware of
the tremendous and shocking hardships faced by
women in ordinary life, but even more so during times
of conflict.

We were also aware of the commendable
programmes already in place to address this dire
situation, such as the Beijing Declaration and the
Platform for Action. It was however, disappointingly
clear that progress was too little and too slow and that
the changing nature of conflicts resulted in a
deterioration in the situation of women and girls. We
therefore saw the urgent need to step up efforts, and
hence the Security Council debate that resulted in the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

Resolution 1325 (2000) was hailed as a landmark
decision and became a strong instrument with which
the rights of women and girls could be negotiated and
protected. In some cases, it served as a strong deterrent
to halt further violence and abuse against women and
girls.

Today, we are meeting here on the second
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and we thank
you for the initiative to convene this meeting. We have
before us a detailed and well-researched study on
women and peace and security, and the report by the
Secretary-General which highlights the major findings
and conclusions of the study. I thank the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women
for the excellent work on the study in cooperation with
the Task Force on Women, Peace and Security.
Furthermore, we commend the Executive Director of
UNIFEM. for commissioning an assessment, by
independent experts, on the impact of armed conflict
on women, and women's role in peace-building. We
look forward to that assessment.

The report before us presents in clear terms the
challenges that must be addressed if progress is to be
made in achieving gender equality in the area of peace
and security. More important, it includes a set of useful
recommendations which, if implemented, can
strengthen and accelerate the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and can have a profoundly
positive impact on the situation of women and girls in
conflict situations and in general.

The study and other reports show that a number
of measures have been taken to implement the
resolution. However, we also know that very little has
been achieved in practical terms to improve the plight
of women and girls, and that the odds stacked against
them remain as high as ever. Women continue to be
disproportionately affected by conflict. A large
majority of refugees and internally displaced persons
are women. They are still subjected to rape, sexual
exploitation, trafficking and other forms of
dehumanization, thus making them more vulnerable to
sexually transmitted diseases, especially HIV/AIDS.
Also, women are neither sufficiently nor appropriately
represented at all levels and stages of decision-making
in peace processes and peacekeeping operations.

There are unique and particular hardships faced
by women and girls under foreign occupation. They
have to cope with all the prejudices against women in
the most inhumane and oppresive conditions. It is our
hope that this issue will be addressed more
comprehensively in future, and that the Security
Council will one day commission a study on the plight
of women and girls under foreign occupation, with a
View to taking appropriate action. Similarly, we feel
that it is important that an analysis be done on the
impact of sanctions from a gender perspective.

In light of what I have said, it is clear that there
remains a critical need to strengthen our resolve and
resources to ensure that all provisions of resolution
1325 (2000) are fully implemented. We welcome and
support the Secretary-General's call for further decisive
action by all concerned to ensure that the concerns of
women and girls are incorporated into all our efforts to
promote peace and security.

My delegation welcomes the entry into force of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
in which gender concerns were taken into consideration
when genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes were defined. Also important is the fact that the
International Criminal Court will have fair
representation of female judges, and that there will be
gender balance in all three organs of the Court.

Despite these positive developments, much more
must to be done to ensure gender-sensitive justice and
to address the specific needs of women. In that regard,
my delegation attaches great importance to
recommendations pertaining to the appointment of
judges and advisers with legal expertise on specific
issues, such as violations of the rights of women and
girls, including gender-based and sexual violence, in
future ad hoc tribunals created by the Security Council.

My delegation fully supports all efforts aimed at
increasing the participation of women in all aspects of
peace operations, in particular at the highest levels of
decision-making. Women are perfectly capable, and in
many instances they possess special qualities that can
be of benefit to peace operations. The full involvement
of women in negotiations of peace agreements at
national, regional and international levels has to
become common practice.

Furthermore, gender perspectives have to be
explicitly incorporated into the mandates of all
peacekeeping missions. At the same time, gender
representation at Headquarters and in missions should
be strengthened. In this regard, we hope that a gender
unit will be established at Headquarters, in line with
the recommendation of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
and welcome his renewed undertaking to set concrete
targets for the appointment of women as special
representatives and special envoys in order to reach a
50 per cent target by 2015. My country is also well on
its way to achieving a 50:50 ratio between men and
women as soon as possible and at all levels and in all
branches of Government.

In order to ensure durable peace after
peacekeeping operations have ended, and to prevent
gender inequalities from persisting or deepening during
the post-conflict period, the rehabilitation and
reconstruction processes should also benefit from
strong gender perspectives. The participation of women
in post-conflict rehabilitation and reconstruction
processes has to be strengthened by, among other
things, incorporating women's needs in initial project
appraisals and by developing targeted activities, with
adequate resources, which focus on specific needs of
women and girls. Multilateral organizations which
provide assistance after conflict can play an important
role in establishing these standards.

Finally, I believe that we have all the information
we need on this issue. In the first place, we have
resolution 1325 (2000). We have the reports and
recommendations of the Secretary-General. We have
the study on women and peace and security. We also
have all the necessary legal instruments. We have
heard, through the Arria formula, the voices of women
who experience hardship on a daily basis, and we are
awaiting an assessment by the independent experts.

What is required now is effective implementation
by all of us: Member States; parties to conflicts; the
United Nations system, with the Security Council
taking the lead; non-governmental organizations; civil
society; and all other stakeholders. We must leave this
Chamber with a renewed sense of urgency, dedication
and commitment to seriously address the plight of
women and girls in armed conflict and to ensure the
active participation of women in peace processes and
post-conflict peace-building activities.

I wish to reaffirm my delegation's resolve to
continue to play an active role in the efforts of the
international community to achieve that goal.

