Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama): 1 have the honour of
speaking today on behalf of the members of the Human
Security Network, a cross-regional network made up
of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer, and my own country, Panama.
The Human Security Network is an informal group of
States that promotes the integration of a human security
approach into policies and programmes at the regional,
national and international levels.
Seventeen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and two years after the global review
of its implementation, this open debate is needed to
focus on the concrete implementation of the normative
framework. Through the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015), the Security Council once again reaffirmed
its commitment to the agenda and to the need to
coordinate responses and accelerate implementation.
We particularly welcome the work of the Council's
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security as an important tool to ensure that the agenda
receives adequate attention in the Council's work. The
Human Security Network calls upon Member States,
United Nations entities and regional and subregional
organizations to support other Member States in their
efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and all
subsequent resolutions.

There is a need for greater recognition and
support of women's full and effective participation
in all stages of conflict resolution and post-conflict
reconciliation processes, so that peace agreements can
be more effective. Women can, and must, play a key
role in conflict prevention and resolution and in the
construction and decision-making of sustainable peace
processes. We welcome the United Nations Trust Fund
for Human Security programmes that have supported
women as agents of change in achieving and sustaining
peace. We call for greater application of the human
security approach to advance inclusive prevention
and peacebuilding efforts. Since our debate last year
(see S/PV.7793), a number of important developments
and events have taken place within the United Nations
that have helped ensure the advancement of this
important agenda.

First, we welcome the Secretary-General's
commitment and his strategy on gender parity
to reach 50/50. We also welcome the launch of
Spotlight - a European Union-United Nations
initiative aimed at combating violence against women
by supporting women's empowerment.

Secondly, the High-level Political Forum thematic
review of Sustainable Development Goal 5, on achieving
gender equality and the empowerment of all women
and girls, saw the integration of the gender-responsive
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We welcome that ongoing process.

Thirdly, the recent high-level meeting on the Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and
the adoption of the political declaration demonstrated
a renewed commitment to the protection of victims
of forced labour, sexual servitude and other forms of
exploitation and abuse, which target the weakest and
most vulnerable - women and girls, but also boys.
We cannot turn a blind eye to the violence exerted
by extremist groups, which infringe upon the rights,
dignity and integrity of their lives.

The Network expresses its profound concern about
the impact of forced displacement on women and girls.
Addressing that matter calls for the involvement of
women inthe design and implementation of humanitarian
action and early recovery measures. That should also
take into account the increasing need for sustained
donor support to host countries and communities, so
that they can appropriately support women's resilience.
Doing so will strengthen the humanitarian development
nexus and improve coordination with peacebuilding
and the protection of human rights.

We also call for greater efforts to promote and
respect the human rights of women and girls, as well
as to strengthen all efforts to effectively address
gender-based violence, including conflict-related
sexual violence. For too, long sexual violence has
been committed on a systematic and widespread scale
as crimes against humanity and it has been used as a
weapon of war. Women and girls are today targets of
sexual and gender-based violence at an alarming rate.

We stress the importance of fighting impunity and
ensuring accountability under national or international
jurisdictions. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's initiative of convening a high-level meeting
on combating sexual exploitation and abuse, which
served as a visible demonstration of the solidarity
of the international community in condemning and
combating that scourge, while placing the rights and
dignity of victims at the forefront of collective efforts.

In conclusion, women's empowerment and
meaningful participation are a cornerstone of any
prevention and protection response. The economic,
political and social empowerment of women and girls
reduces their vulnerability and enhances their ability
to protect themselves and exercise their rights. We
must ensure that women's and girls' interests are
fully respected and systematically integrated into all
peace processes.

