Ms. Mina-Rojas (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Afro-descendants of Colombia's ancestral regions, I
bring warm greetings oflife,joy, hope and freedom. I am
present at today's meeting in my capacity as a member of
the human rights team of the Proceso de Comunidades
Negras, the Red de Solidaridad Afro-Colombiana, la
Alianza Negra por la Paz and the Instancia Especial de
Alto Nivel con Pueblos Etnicos. I am also speaking on
behalf of the non-governmental organizations working
group on women, peace and security.

I am an Afro-descendant woman and a peace
and human rights activist. I have spent half of my
life raising awareness about and fighting for the
cultural, territorial and political rights of Afro-
descendant women and our communities, and for
our self-determination. It is an honour and a great
responsibility to have been nominated by my colleagues
around the world to represent the women and peace
and security civil society and community at today's
important debate. As spokesperson for the Afro-
Colombian Peace Council, I was extensively involved
in the historic Havana peace process between the
Colombian Government and the guerrilla group Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (PARC), and
I advocated for the rights and expectations of Afro-
descendant peoples to be part of the peace accord
that Colombia and the world are celebrating today.
I can speak first-hand to the importance of inclusive
negotiations and implementation processes that support
the participation of women and groups from ethnically
and racially diverse backgrounds, in reflection of the
principles underlying resolution 1325 (2000). Columbia
has become a fresh source of hope because of the
comprehensive peace accord that was reached.

Two provisions were particularly progressive,
though we had to push that door really hard. Those
two provisions could radically change future peace
processes around the world. The first is the explicit
inclusion of a gender perspective as an intersectional
principle, and the second the inclusion of the ethnic
chapter, which provides important safeguards to ensure
respect for the autonomy of indigenous and Afro-
descendant peoples and the protection and promotion
of their rights from a gender, family and generational
perspective. The inclusion of these two specific
principles is a historic advancement in the area ofpeace
and security from which the United Nations and other
countries experiencing violence and armed conflict
could learn. The peace accord was very important for
civil society, women, indigenous and Afro-descendant
peoples and our communities. We continue to expect
that its implementation will include our engagement
and active participation of women.

Colombia, however, risks wasting this opportunity
for peace if it does not completely disarm and if the
communities most impacted during the internal armed
conflict, including women, human rights leaders and
activists, continue to be ignored in the implementation
of the peace accord. I am here today to make visible
their urgent calls and wish to stress that for my people,
this is truly a matter of life and death.

I should like to focus on three urgent priority
areas: the participation of ethnically diverse women;
ensuring the security of human rights defenders, civil-
society activists and indigenous and Afro-descendant
communities; and the inclusive monitoring and
implementation of peace processes.

First is ensuring the ongoing participation of
women, in all areas related to the implementation ofthe
peace accord, with a focus on diversity. As with women
around the world, women in Colombia, and particularly
Afro-descendant women, have been mobilizing for
decades to make visible the violations of our rights but
also to ensure significant transformations in the way
peace and security is approached.

My dear sister Rita Lopidia, from South Sudan, was
here last year (see S/PV.7793) and gave testimony on
the importance of South Sudanese women participating
in the ongoing peace and security dialogues. In
Afghanistan, the few women on the High Peace
Council must continue fighting to have their voices
heard. In Colombia, there is no representative of Afro-
descendant women on the High-level Body on Gender,
the body established to oversee the implementation of
the accord's gender chapter.

As the parties to the peace accord work with the
international community to demobilize FARC fighters,
paramilitaries and other armed actors have filled the
power vacuum left by FARC forces in many areas
in Colombia. This has created an urgent need for
local women's organizations and community leaders
to be consulted and to participate in the design of
local protection strategies aimed at keeping our
communities safe.

The Security Council and the international
community must support the Colombian Government
in the process of designing and implementing gender-
responsive, community-based security and self-
protection systems, in consultation with Afro-descendant
and indigenous communities. The failure to listen
to our security concerns and warnings has had
devastating results.

(spoke in English)

We believe that to listen and comply is
vitally important.

(spoke in Spanish)

This brings me to my second point: the need to
guarantee our integral and collective security. Security
involves the safety of our leaders and communities
and respect for and the protection of territories and
territorial rights. The proliferation of weapons is
fuelling increased fear and forced displacement among
largely indigenous and Afro-descendant communities
and negatively impacting women's participation and
mobility, as well as resulting in increased sexual and
gender-based violence. We are alarmed at the increasing
number of assassinations and threats to human rights
defenders and peace activists across Colombia.

For example, in Tumaco, a municipality near the
border with Ecuador, urban leaders and members of
the Community Council of Alto Mira and Frontera
continue to be targeted by paramilitary groups and
FARC and other dissidents who seek territorial control
in order to grow and sell coca. Just last week, we buried
our brother Jair Cortes, the sixth leader killed in that
municipality, and we had to urgently move out several
women leaders and their families who had received
death threats.

Sexual and gender-based violence and the stigmatization
that comes with it, especially for indigenous and
Afro-descendant women and their children, is also a
matter of integral and collective security. The silence
around these crimes is as appalling as the crimes
themselves. Women activists risk their lives to bring
cases to justice. There is an urgent need to establish
a direct line of communication between indigenous
and Afro-descendant authorities and representatives
of women's organizations in all mechanisms of the
Comprehensive System for Truth, Coexistence,
Reparations and Non-Repetition to ensure that these
cases are prioritized, the perpetrators are brought to
justice and survivors provided with life-saving medical
and psychosocial services.

Finally, it is crucial that the framework plan for the
implementation of the peace accord include specific
goals and indicators designed to measure the progress
and outcomes of policies, programmes and reforms
in a manner corresponding to the needs, values and
rights of indigenous and Afro-descendant peoples.
It is critical that the Colombian Government and its
implementation commission accept and integrate
the ethnic perspectives and indicators, including
specific gender ethnic indicators, developed and
provided to them by indigenous and Afro-descendant
organizations earlier this month. Political will on these
indicators is needed, and they must be included in the
legal framework of the peace accord. They will help
effectively transform the wartime conditions that are
hampering the well-being, social development and
collective security of indigenous and Afro-descendant
women and our communities.

For Afro-descendant women in Colombia and
indigenous women leaders worldwide, ensuring our
collective security also means that the principles of free,
prior and informed consent and consultation; autonomy;
cultural integrity and meaningful participation are
respected, and that our rights, as enshrined in national
and international human rights standards, are fully
promoted and protected.

Peace in Colombia and elsewhere is not simply a
matter of ending war and violence but also of addressing
collectively the root causes of conflict, including
social, gender and racial injustice, and promoting the
well-being of all peoples, of all races and religions. It
is key to support the efforts of local women activists to
demilitarize and disarm all our societies and to stem
the flow of small arms, as set out in the Arms Trade
Treaty and other legal instruments.

It is the responsibility of all actors, including the
Security Council, the United Nations system, regional
and subregional organizations and, importantly,
Member States, to fulfil their obligations. The women
and peace and security agenda, if implemented and
financially resourced, can be a path to peace in my
country and around the world, with gender equality,
women's empowerment and the protection of women's
rights playing a central role in conflict prevention and
the creation of a sustainable peace.

