Ms. Nason (Ireland): Ireland takes women and
peace and security seriously. Almost 20 years after the
Good Friday Agreement and our own peace process
in Ireland, we firmly believe in the importance of the
role of women in conflict prevention and resolution and
peacekeeping and -building. I think it is fair to say that
we are a testament to that. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2017/861) correctly highlights that if we
are to successfully deliver on the women and peace
and security agenda, we absolutely need broad-based
cooperation and coherence in what we do, and that must
be at the international, regional and national levels. We
see this as essential to the fundamentally transformative
nature of the women and peace and security agenda. I
stress that none of us can deliver that alone. We have
to work together and, importantly, it is crucial that we
work in full partnership with civil society. This year
and next, Ireland, as Chair of the Commission on the
Status of Women will embed the women and peace and
security agenda in everything we do. We look forward
to working hand in hand with our excellent partner UN-
Women to deliver on that.

All the evidence shows that ensuring women's
empowerment and participation in peacebuilding is
critical to creating any lasting peace. It is not just the
right thing to do, it has been shown to be the smart and, if
I may say so, the efficient way to deliver on sustainable
peace. Initiatives strengthening women's capacity to
participate in peace processes and enhancing gender
expertise and mediation need our support. We thank the
United Nations entities, including UN-Women, that are
working every day to find the tools to do that.

Ireland currently funds non-governmental organizations
that we think can make a difference in this area, including
the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue and its "Women
at the Peace Table - Africa" initiative in Nigeria, the
Dialogue Advisory Group and the Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political Affairs. Last year
we hosted a regional workshop on the acceleration
of resolution 1325 (2000) in which the discussion
was devoted to gender advisers from peacekeeping
operations in the United Nations, the European Union
(EU) and NATO. Ireland is also a founding member
and a key funder of the excellent Women's Peace and
Humanitarian Fund. We support women in that role in
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and accountability.
The Fund facilitates valuable civil-society initiatives in
conflict-affected countries such as Burundi, promoting
women's leadership on the ground. We are working
in Jordan for the empowerment of Syrian refugees.
Frankly, we need to do more of that.

Nationally, Ireland is currently working to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) through our second
national action plan on women and peace and security.
We are particularly focusing on the empowerment
and participation of women in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. We welcome the Secretary-General's
recognition of the importance of synergies between
the agendas on young people and peace and security
and women and peace and security. Ireland is pleased
to be funding the progress study on youth, peace and
security led by the Peacebuilding Support Office. We
see the role and potential of young women's meaningful
participation in peacebuilding as significant, and we
must challenge the obstacles that prevent young women
on the ground from participating. The interlinking of
these two agendas is an area that we plan to highlight as
we build our third national action plan for 2018.

I am proud to say that the Irish Defence Forces have
adopted their own action plan for women and peace and
security, mainstreaming the priorities across all areas
of their policy, including in their overseas engagement.
There are trained gender advisers and focal points in all
units, and our Defence Forces are committed to doubling
the rate of female participation in peacekeeping by
2021. We strongly support and implement a policy of
zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.

Of course, many women are vulnerable. Ireland
welcomes the Secretary-General's focus on the
protection of women and girls during conflict and in
humanitarian responses. We make sure that our Irish
aid policies make the protection of women and girls
a top priority in our rapid-response initiatives. We
support accountability initiatives for ending impunity
for sexual exploitation and abuse, including through
working in partnership with Justice Rapid Response
and UN-Women. We would like to underscore Ireland's
major cooperation with and financial support to the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Ireland is one
of only 14 States, along with the EU, that are signatories
to the Call to Action on Protection from Gender-based
Violence in Emergencies. This is a multi-stakeholder
initiative to fundamentally transform the way gender-
based violence is addressed in humanitarian action, and
we fully support it.

On disarmament, another matter that is a key
priority for us, Ireland's gender and disarmament policy
recognizes the specific effects that the use of weapons
of mass destruction and conventional weapons have on
women and girls. We actively emphasize the importance
of women's participation in disarmament discourse and
salute women's capacity to act as a positive force for
change in that regard, something that we are already
seeing evidence of.

I could sum up by saying that much has been done,
but there is more to do. The challenges remain and even
grow. I need only mention migration and international
protection as two examples ofthe major hills, or perhaps
mountains, that we have to climb. Ireland is ready to
play its part fully in addressing them.

