Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and Mr. Wittig, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Permanent
Representative of Germany, for their respective
briefings on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict and on women's participation in
peacebuilding. Japan also appreciates the President's
initiative to convene this very important debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding following the ministerial-
1evel discussion in April and the Security Council
summit held last month (see S/PV.6389).

Japan welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/386) on the implementation of the
agenda outlined in his 2009 report (S/2009/304). His
observations are all certainly relevant. We look forward
to further progress on all priority items set forth.

Among other things, Japan would like to
highlight the following three points, with a view to
filling in gaps in the process of transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding.

First, in the light of the utmost importance of
national capacity development, more robust action is
needed in mainstreaming it as a system-wide priority
and in integrating short-term interventions into longer-
term strategies for peacebuilding. As shown in dire
cases such as Timor-Leste and Liberia, exit strategies
rely on national security capabilities.

Secondly, Japan stresses the need for the United
Nations system as a whole to clarify the division of
roles for engaging in post-conflict peacebuilding. In
that regard, Japan calls upon the Secretariat to
complete the reviews in the remaining sectors of the
six key peacebuilding sectors, in particular the areas of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform, as early as possible. Based on
the outcome of the reviews, we should embark upon
establishing a better coordinated system to increase the
effectiveness of United Nations support on the ground.

Thirdly, since its establishment in 2005, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has made steady
progress, but we believe the Commission should
further develop its functions. First and foremost, it is
essential that the PBC identify peacebuilding priorities
in a timely manner through consultation with
post-conflict countries and facilitate the necessary
support from the international community, as
appropriate. Japan is ready to take an active part in the
discussion of the PBC review, taking into account the
report submitted by the three co-facilitators, from
Mexico, Ireland and South Africa (S/2010/393, annex).

Finally, with regard to the transition process, I
would like to stress the importance of strengthening the
PBC's advisory function vis-a-vis the Security Council.
In a recent note by the Council President on working
methods (S/2010/507), the Council expressed its
intention to invite, as appropriate, the Chairs of the
country-specific configurations of the PBC to
participate in formal meetings of the Council at which
the situation concerning the country in question is
considered, or on a case-by-case basis, for an exchange
of views in an informal dialogue. Japan hopes that
deepened substantive discussions between the two
organs will lead to a better United Nations impact on
the ground. In that regard, Japan proposes to explore
the possibility of holding such an informal dialogue
before the end of this year in an appropriate manner.

Japan welcomes the Secretary-General's report
on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466). We expect that the Secretary-General
will steadfastly implement the action plan for gender-
responsive peacebuilding to which he committed in the
report, as part of his comprehensive agenda to improve
United Nations peacebuilding efforts. The Security
Council will commemorate the tenth anniversary of its
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) later this month. In
that connection, the Council should conduct a
substantive review of the implementation of the action
plan and its peacebuilding agenda in order to further
mainstream the issue of women and peace and security
in the Council's overall agenda over the next decade.

Japan very much expects that the newly
established United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women) will

play an important role through the implementation of
both policies and programmes. The agenda regarding
women and peace and security, including women's
participation in peacebuilding, should be addressed by
coordinating the relevant United Nations activities
effectively and efficiently. Japan will actively
contribute to the activities of UN Women while
continuing to support the enhancement of women's
participation in peacebuilding, including, inter alia,
through the economic empowerment of women in
post-conflict situations from the perspective of human
security.

