Ms. Lind (Estonia) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the French presidency for having organized
today's open debate.

(spoke in English)

Estonia welcomes the report submitted in April
by the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2016/361) and commends the work of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, as well as the efforts ofthe United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict.

With heavy hearts, we read the Secretary-General's
latest report. Sexual violence in conflict is a continuing
concern and the drastic increase in the number of
victims of trafficking is striking. As a European Union
(EU) member State, Estonia fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered here today by the Deputy Head of
the EU delegation. Given the cross-border dynamics
of human trafficking and an evolving criminal
infrastructure designed to exploit refugees, it is critical
to have good regional and subregional cooperation. We
support closer collaboration between countries and
organizations on this matter.

The global context of peace and security is
changing and the international community is facing
new challenges. Therefore, let me briefly touch upon
two aspects to effectively tackle conflict-related sexual
violence and the growing trend oftrafficking in persons.

First, we need to keep on promoting gender
equality and women's empowerment in order to address
the root causes of conflict-related sexual violence. It
is important to raise awareness and end the prevalence
of stereotypical attitudes, social norms and practices
that support and reproduce discrimination and violence
against women. Estonia has included the protection of
women in national strategies on conflict prevention
and last year adopted its second national action plan for
years 2015-2019 to implement resolution 1325 (2000).

Secondly, there must be no room for impunity for
sexual and gender-based crimes. Perpetrators must
be held accountable. In this regard, Estonia reiterates
the important role of the International Criminal Court
in situations where States are unable or unwilling to
bring perpetrators to justice domestically. However, if
perpetrators are to be held accountable, it is important
that those who have suffered from conflict-related
sexual violence report such violence and not be held
back by fear and stigma. This once more emphasizes
the importance of awareness-raising and changing
social norms.

It is of utmost importance to continue to recognize
and address the nexus between trafficking in persons
and conflict-related sexual violence. Too many
individuals, families and communities have been
affected and devastated. Preventing and responding
to sexual violence is vital to resolving conflicts,
enabling development and building sustainable peace.
The international community has to work together
to respond to the urgency of this issue and Estonia is
ready to actively engage in those efforts.

