Mr. J erandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in organizing this important open debate on
women and peace and security. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations for their excellent
statements.

My delegation appreciates the opportunity to
participate in this debate. We reiterate Tunisia's
longstanding commitment to promoting gender
equality and women's empowerment, especially in
relation to conflict situations, as well as our
determination to properly implement the goals of
resolution 1325 (2000), of which my country was one
of the authors. Tunisia continues to be profoundly
convinced that peace, development and democracy will
not be achieved without women's participation as
powerful actors of change.

We particularly wish to highlight the importance
of replacing the image of women in conflict situations
as humiliated, marginalized victims - with an image
of active partners in the process of conflict prevention,
mediation and resolution.
It must be recognized that there has been growing
awareness of the many forms of violence against
women in conflict situations and of the threats that
such violence poses to their security, their health and
their ability to actively participate in peace processes.
It is important to give women, who are the first victims
of violence in all its manifestations, a primary role in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and it is even more
important and urgent to do so in the process of conflict
prevention.

It is also clear that Security Council debates have
led to significant normative innovations, in particular
the appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
deployment of women's protection advisers within
peacekeeping missions, and the operationalization of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict. They must receive the financial
assistance necessary to enable them to help countries
develop comprehensive national strategies to combat
violence against women.

Tunisia, for its part, has begun to implement a
plan of action for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), which, inter alia, encourages the training
of women in the area of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, in order to be able to deploy qualified
personnel to United Nations missions in the field. It is
intended in particular to improve predeployment
training, with particular stress on special measures to
protect women against all forms of violence.

It is clear, however, that despite the progress
achieved, violence against women in armed conflict
persists, as is reflected in the most recent report
(S/2012/33) of the Secretary-General on conflict-
related sexual violence. This is a reminder that a great
deal remains to be done in order to achieve all of the
objectives set out in resolution 1325 (2000), and that it
is very important that the Security Council remain
seized of this issue and take additional, vigorous
measures aimed at strengthening the protection of
women in armed conflicts.

National ownership of the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council remains the best way to ensure
their effective implementation. In that context, it is up
to States, first and foremost, to take the coercive and
awareness-raising measures necessary to resolve the
problem. Civil society organizations should also
contribute significantly to strengthening the protection
of women in that context, with a view to making it
possible to amplify the voices of women victims of
violence, break the silence on their suffering, and
support the awareness-raising initiatives taken on their
behalf.

Convinced of the urgent need to put an end to
impunity for such heinous acts, Tunisia, which acceded

to the Rome Statute recently, a few months after the
revolution, believes that it is crucial to further promote
international cooperation and assistance so as to
strengthen, inter alia, the capacities of Governments to
develop national early-warning systems aimed at
preventing an escalation of violence against women. It
is also imperative that they investigate and prosecute
the perpetrators of such acts, in accordance with the
responsibilities incumbent upon them by virtue of their
accession to international human rights and
humanitarian law instruments.

Dealing with this issue is a reminder to us of the
tragic situations facing women in many conflicts and
crises around the world. Women are the first to be
caught up in the turmoil of flight and internal
displacement and confined, usually with their children,
to refugee camps, where their situation is most
precarious.

In Africa - a continent that, unfortunately, is
afflicted by many crises and conflicts - many
thousands of women are affected by the ravages of war
and crises of all kinds. The debate on this issue also
brings to mind the situation of Palestinian women, who
are systematically oppressed as a result of the Israeli
practices in the occupied Palestinian territories and the
occupied Syrian Golan. A Palestinian woman aged 60
today would have since birth known only the abuses of
the occupation, spending her entire life crossing
checkpoints, fleeing bombings and burying and
mourning the dead. Such women and many others must
serve as an impetus for the Council to take urgent
action so that they can live in dignity and simply
realize their rights as human beings.

To conclude, I wish to reiterate that my country
remains at the disposal of the United Nations in the
context of any action relating to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and of other international
instruments aimed at strengthening the full
participation of women in the decision-making process
and at ensuring a deep-rooted culture of human rights,
as a fundamental guarantee of the elimination of all
forms of violence against women.
