Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting of the Council on
women and peace and security. France welcomes the
appointment of Ms. Margot Wallstrom as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and we thank her for her frank
appraisal of how to improve the effectiveness of the
United Nations system in this area. We commend the
very promising first steps she has taken in her mission.

We support her recommendations. It is necessary
for the Council, in complement to actions being carried
out by other organs, agencies, funds and programmes
of the United Nations to advance women, to continue
to take into account the situation of women in
conflicts, in the light of its effects on the maintenance
of international peace and security. In parallel, the
United Nations system should strengthen the coherence
of its action, and, in this regard, we welcome the
cooperation that has already been established with the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy.

Focus needs to be placed on the prevention of
sexual violence, in particular to ensure that such
violence does not become a systematic tactic of
warfare. In this regard, the Council should continue its
efforts to systematically integrate the approach
recommended in its resolutions on women and peace
and security into operational mandates and to persuade
the parties to conflicts to incorporate this perspective
into their peace processes.

We thank the Special Representative for what she
has told us about her recent visit to the Congo. This
information will help us in preparing for the Council's
upcoming visit to that country, in mid-May. And we
will, of course, continue to advocate with the
Congolese authorities for the five perpetrators of
sexual violence in the situation that was brought to
their attention to be brought to justice. Some trials
have begun, but are proceeding too slowly. The fight
against sexual violence and impunity remains a priority
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There is a long list of other tragic situations, and
unfortunately it is far from exhaustive. We are
reminded of that by the violence against women from
ethnic minorities in Nepal and Burma, and by the
sexual violence prevalent in former conflicts zones in
C6te d'Ivoire and in Guinea and Kenya. In addressing
these situations, the specific measures for the
implementation of resolution 1888 (2009) - including
the rapid deployment of experts to the field and
advisers for the protection of women in peacekeeping
operations - should have a positive impact. However,
Ms. Wallstrom has a huge task ahead of her. She can
count on France to help her to fulfil it and to continue
to firmly support her work.

I should also like to thank Ms. Mayanja for her
statement and to commend the outstanding work of her
Department in providing the Council with indicators in
monitoring implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

The presidential statement to be adopted at the
end of this meeting is a technical one and will launch a
phase of consultation between the Secretariat and the
Council that should lead to the adoption in October of
a coherent set of indicators proposed by the Secretary-
General in accordance with the targets set in resolution
1889 (2009). I shall not list every indicator, since we
are all familiar with them.

I should simply like to welcome the fact that
women and girls are being taken into account in
demobilization and reintegration programmes. France
attaches particular importance to this issue because
women and girls are often left out of demobilization
and reintegration programmes, which are aimed
exclusively at armed combatants. One of the key
contributions of the principles and commitments
agreed in Paris in 2007, in partnership with UNICEF, is
precisely that they allow us better to take that
dimension into account.

In conclusion, I recall that France supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation that a ministerial
meeting be convened at United Nations Headquarters
on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) in October in order to assess
progress made in the past decade and to open new
prospects.

