Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Mr. President, I
thank you for organizing today's open debate. I would
also like to thank our three briefers for their sobering
contributions to our discussion today. My delegation
aligns itself with the statement to be made on behalf of
the European Union.

As others before me have said, women and
girls are usually the first victims of conflict. They
are disproportionately affected by conflict-related
displacement, rights deprivation, marginalization
and abuse. They are also the prime targets of sexual
violence and rape and of forced and child marriages.
In 1999, the Security Council took a unanimous
decision to systematically address the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Since then, a considerable
normative base has been created and progress achieved.
The adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) has
contributed significantly to furthering the protection of
women agenda.

The primary responsibility to protect civilian
populations, as we all know, rests with national
Governments. The international community has to
step in, however, when that responsibility is neglected,
whether it be for lack of capacity or political will, or
breakdown of the State. As discussed in previous debates
on the protection of civilians, effective protection
requires clear and well-designed protection mandates
that are supported by adequate means, resources and
training, among other things. Gender-disaggregated
data is essential to informed decisions on the protection
of civilians.

To ensure adequate protection of women and girls,
implementation of relevant mandates must take into
account local specificities, conditions and prevailing
customs and practices. For protection purposes, it does
matter how far women have to go to get water or food
or collect cooking wood, how they can take care of their
basic sanitation needs, what kind of terrain they have to
cross to safety, whether they can trust their own local
officials and police to report their attackers, whether
the patrolling patterns of peacekeepers support their
movement patterns, and so many other things that
women themselves can only best know. Therefore, in
all respects, consulting women on the ground to make
sure that protection mandates respond to their real
protection needs is essential.

The presence of and adequate support for women's
protection advisers on the ground, personal commitment
ofa mission's leadership to gender-sensitive protection,
predeployment guidance and training of the military,
police and civilian personnel not simply on the basics of
civilian protection but on gender-sensitive protection of
civilians, and the sharing among missions of effective
gender-sensitive protection practices and lessons
learned are also important. As others before me have
said, more women peacekeepers and police officers in
United Nations missions and more women in leadership
positions in peacekeeping are equally important.

The strict implementation of a zero-tolerance
policy vis-a-vis sexual abuse among peacekeepers is yet
another necessary element of the protection of women
and girls in a conflict situation. Our briefer, Ms. Ilwad
Elman, has eloquently spoken on that topic.

Protection also requires addressing the problem of
widespread availability of illicit small arms and light
weapons and the impact of the illicit trade in arms on
the lives of women and girls in conflict zones, as our
Nigerian colleague has described. The Arms Trade
Treaty, which came into effect last December, requires
transfers to be assessed against the risk of gender-based
violence or serious acts of violence against women and,
if duly implemented, would make a real difference to
the protection of women agenda.

While physical protection measures in the field
are a vital and most immediate form of protection
response, promoting an environment supportive of
women's participation is key. To this end, all United
Nations efforts and presence on the ground have to be
synchronized to produce that enabling environment
where women and girls will be safe and free to
engage in the processes that affect their lives. Nothing
enhances the protection of women better that their full
involvement and participation in all decision-making
processes at all stages of conflict resolution, national
reconciliation and post-conflict reconstruction.

Let me stress in particular the importance of
strengtheningtheruleoflawandpursuitofaccountability
for violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, including gender-based violence
and rape. Today's briefers have stressed that tackling
impunity is paramount in such situations. Relevant
work by national justice and prosecution mechanisms
is essential, and the international community must
invest in strengthening national judicial, prosecution
and corrections capacities. Building such capacities in
a country emerging from conflict, however, does take
time.

It is therefore important that the Security Council
act, continue to support accountability and use the full
range of means at its disposal to support that end, inter
alia by making more systematic use of referrals to the
International Criminal Court, mandating commissions
ofinquiry, acting on the reports ofsuch commissions and
reinforcing the application of gender parameters among
the designation criteria in all of the sanctions regimes.
The greater involvement of the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General on sexual violence in
conflict and children and armed conflict in the work
of the sanctions committees and their interaction and
exchanges of information with respective panels of
experts would strengthen sanctions committees' focus
on violence against women and allow for perpetrators to
be pursued and sanctioned with greater determination.
That in itself would strengthen the deterrence element
vis-a-vis the perpetrators and support the protection
work carried out on the ground.

I did not intend to speak today on specific country
situations. However, I would like to conclude my
remarks by responding to the comments made by the
Russian delegation. We appreciate its concern regarding
the growing number of civilian casualties and women
suffering in eastern Ukraine. However, as we know, the
best protection for the women of eastern Ukraine is in
Russia's hands. It is up to Russia to put an end to those
horrors by cutting off all supplies - military, financial
and personnel-related - to its proxies, the illegal
militants, whose abysmal lawlessness has been amply
documented by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights reports presented here

in the Council, and whose impunity has contributed in
the most direct of ways to the suffering that women in
eastern Ukraine are enduring.

