Ms. Mayanja: I am honoured to have the
opportunity to speak at this open debate of the Security
Council on the subject of women, peace and security. I
thank the President for convening this discussion on
women's participation in peace processes.

This discussion is taking place as we mark the
fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Security
Council's historic resolution 1325 (2000), and a month
after the General Assembly's adoption of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), which reaffirmed the commitment of world
leaders to the full and effective implementation of the
resolution.

The resolution fundamentally changed the image
of women from that of being exclusively victims of
war to that of being active participants as peacemakers,
peacebuilders and negotiators. Women at the grass-
roots level in countries as diverse as Afghanistan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, the Sudan and
Timor-Leste have used the resolution to lobby for their
voices to be heard in peacebuilding processes, in post-
conflict elections and in the rebuilding of their
societies.

Since the resolution was adopted, a lot of
progress has been made within the United Nations
system itself in terms of understanding how to
incorporate gender concerns into all aspects of peace
and security. Department-specific action plans on
gender mainstreaming are being prepared; gender-
sensitive guidelines and new tools in a variety of areas
have been issued; and staff are being trained.

Despite that progress, gaps remain. Women's and
girls' bodies have become battle grounds. A lot remains
to be done in such critical areas as conflict prevention
and early warning, capacity-building for peacemaking
and peacebuilding, protecting women and girls,
combating gender-based violence and preventing
sexual exploitation and abuse, to name a few.

As requested by the Council in its presidential
statement contained in document S/PRST/2004/40, a
system-wide action plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000) has been developed, in cooperation with the
Inter-Agency Task Force on Women and Peace and
Security. The plan, to which 37 United Nations entities
contributed, is before the Council in the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2005/636.

The objectives of the action plan, which covers
the period from 2005 to 2007, are to formulate
concrete strategies, actions and programmes to
promote the role of women, support efforts by Member
States and civil society and strengthen the commitment
and accountability of the United Nations system at the
highest levels.

Resolution 1325 (2000), along with three
subsequent Security Council presidential statements,
constituted the conceptual framework of the plan. The
Summit Outcome, the report of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change (A/59/565) and the
Secretary-General's report entitled "In larger freedom"
(A/59/2005) provided a broader political background,
shifting from a focus on State security to one
encompassing human security.

The plan is structured on the basis of 12 areas of
action identified in the resolution and the three
presidential statements. Each United Nations entity
identified specific time-bound activities and strategies
to be undertaken within its mandate. The responsibility
for the implementation of activities lies with each of
those entities.

The key to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is accountability and commitment. An analysis
conducted by my Office of resolutions adopted by the
Security Council in the period July 2004 to July 2005
revealed that language on women or gender issues was
included in only 14 per cent of 63 resolutions. The
reporting to the Council on gender issues by the
Secretary-General has dramatically improved, with 47
per cent of the reports making multiple references to
gender concerns, compared with 17.8 per cent in the
period 2000-2003.

In order to enhance accountability, the report of
the Secretary-General proposes, inter alia, the
following measures: more systematic oversight and
monitoring of progress at the inter-governmental level;
enhanced inter-agency coordination through the High
Level Committee on Programmes of the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination; holding heads of entities directly
accountable for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in their respective programmes and operations
and developing internal accountability procedures; and
increased interaction at all levels with civil society.

The success of the implementation of the plan
depends on five factors: effective support and
accountability on the part of the Security Council;
commitment at the highest levels of United Nations
entities; full cooperation by Governments, parties to
conflicts and women's organizations with United
Nations entities; effective inter-agency coordination;
and, sufficient resources to do the job.

The Peacebuilding Commission approved at the
General Assembly summit will have an opportunity to
make an effective contribution to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). I am convinced that the
Commission would greatly benefit from women's
active participation in its deliberations, systematic
gender mainstreaming in its work and dialogue with
women's groups and non-governmental organizations.

My recent mission to the Sudan reinforced my
conviction that we must urgently accelerate the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Women shoulder the main burden of post-conflict
problems and are the primary victims of unspeakable
sexual and gender-based violence. I call on the Council
to hold the parties to conflicts fully accountable for
protecting women's human rights, and on donors to
ensure that humanitarian and development assistance
reaches women.

Gender equality is absolutely essential to the
success of any peace process. We must use the
untapped potential of women in maintaining peace and
security. As the international community struggles with
how to respond to global threats and challenges and as
the Secretary-General undertakes far-reaching steps in
implementing the Summit Outcome, it is vital that we
make the principles of resolution 1325 (2000) and
women's contributions an integral part of all of our
efforts.

I urge all members to ensure that discussions on
reform and on country-specific conflict situations
include practical strategies to accelerate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I call on all
Member States to adopt strategies and action plans for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and for
promoting women's participation. Without the equal
participation of women in all decision-making
processes in the United Nations, including the Council,
and within Member States, the vision outlined in the
Charter will elude us.

Before closing, I would like to say that I
participated this morning in a cyber-dialogue organized
by the International Women's Tribune Centre, during
which women from Timor-Leste, the Philippines,
Zimbabwe and other countries asked me to convey to
the Council the urgency of the need to accelerate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

