Mrs. Boura (Greece): I would like to join others
in expressing condolences to Russia in connection with
the assassination of its Ambassador in Ankara, and to
Germany in connection with the victims of the terrorist
attack in Berlin.

I wish to congratulate Spain for having organized
this open debate. Greece aligns itselfwith the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to add the following from a national point
of view.

Over the past two decades, the ground-breaking
work of the United Nations bodies, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council
of Europe, the International Organization for Migration
and regional initiatives such as the European Union
Network of National Rapporteurs has consolidated an
important legislative framework for eradicating human
trafficking. Yet despite the efforts made, the official
statistics on human trafficking remain comparable to
those of a "rare crime", with just a small percentage of
perpetrators convicted and only a few victims saved.

We are firmly convinced that the international
community should focus on strengthening law
enforcement, establishing a proactive and inclusive
identification regime for victims and a comprehensive
awareness-raising campaign. At the same time, we need
to step up efforts to crack down on the enormous profits
generated by traffickers by following financial trails,
and use all available investigative tools to prosecute
the perpetrators.

The unprecedented levels of human displacement
have also revealed the increased vulnerability of
potential trafficking victims in refugee and migratory
f lows. Irregular undocumented migrants are particularly
vulnerable to exploitation and abuse, making the nexus
between trafficking and irregular migration more
relevant than ever. While some countries increase
border controls to curb migration flows, many migrants
turn to organized criminal networks to arrange their
border crossing.
Trafficking in women and girls has become a tactic
of terrorism, with terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram openly
and systematically promoting the trafficking and sexual
enslavement of women and girls. To address the nexus
between human trafficking, conflict, sexual violence
and violent extremism requires a holistic approach.
Trafficking as a financial resource for terrorism must
not be underestimated.

Greece is a transit country for thousands ofmigrants
and refugees who attempt to cross the Mediterranean
and flee war, violence and persecution. As the first
entry point for migrants and refugees arriving in
Europe, Greece is very well aware of the challenges and
of its pivotal role in combating such phenomena.

In this context, we have established a national
coordination mechanism as well as a national
identification and referral mechanism. Both
mechanisms are coordinated by the Office of the
National Rapporteur at the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and operate as a hub for partnership-building among all
relevant stakeholders. The comprehensive protection
of vulnerable persons, including women, girls and
unaccompanied children, figures high in our priorities.
Increased emphasis placed on extending identification
procedures in the context of mixed migration and
refugee flows.

Human trafficking, this modern form of slavery,
has no place in the twenty-first century. We hope that
today's debate will mark a flagship event that will urge
all competent stakeholders to deploy the imperative
human, legal and financial resources to effectively
eradicate this heinous form of human rights violation
and organized crime. We need to work closely together
to promote multilateral cooperation, enhance early-
identification procedures and establish robust referral
mechanisms, so that victims can address the protection
services they so need and deserve.

A consistent human rights and cross-sectoral
approach can lead to positive results in counter-
trafficking. To that end, we must identify the
partnerships to be employed, aiming at protecting
vulnerable groups at risk of being exploited or traded.
At the same time, we must combat the culture of
impunity regarding the high levels of "demand" for
"services" related to trafficking.

Let us not forget that the task before us is not merely
about implementing laws and penal codes. We aim first
and foremost to uphold human dignity amid a world
of conflict, poverty and desperation, with vulnerable
groups of women and children at high risk of being
manipulated, exploited and savagely abused for profit.
Traffickers and warlords are relying on our failure to
protect vulnerable people.

