Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Let me express my
appreciation to the German presidency for holding
this open debate. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Pramila Patten and the representatives
of civil society for their moving testimonies.

It is worth mentioning that Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union.

Unfortunately, almost 20 years after the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), not all the objectives of
the women and peace and security agenda have been
achieved. The tragic reality of sexual violence against
men, women, girls and boys continues to constitute
a part of the fabric of each and every armed conflict
around the globe, regardless of whether it is internal
or external in nature. Since the establishment of the
mandate of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
10 years ago, the Security Council has adopted
five resolutions focused, first and foremost, on the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence.

Nevertheless, the issue continues to plague
vulnerable communities and, often times, entire
societies, which are exposed to all kinds of violence
and abuse in conflicts. It is therefore imperative that the
international community and the Security Council in
particular continue to look for the most effective ways to
enhance the implementation of the existing resolutions
on the women and peace and security agenda in order
to tackle and prevent atrocities from being committed,
as well as ensure accountability.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/280)
before us today clearly indicates that structural gender
inequalities and discrimination are at the core of
conflict-related sexual violence. In that regard, we
proceed from the conviction that the path towards the
prevention of all forms of violence against women
and girls lies first in the genuine empowerment of
women and their greater engagement at all levels of
decision-making processes. Equally important is the
task of guaranteeing the victims of sexual violence
the right to justice and live in peace and dignity, free
from stigmatization and any form of discrimination.
Impunity for those crimes is rust on the moral image of
any society and should be eradicated.

Ukraine attaches great importance to the equal
and full participation of women in all activities in
the areas of national security, conflict prevention and
resolution, peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Practical
steps are being taken to integrate the women and peace
and security agenda into the ongoing security and
defence reform in my country. The active integration of
gender equality into the activities of the armed forces
of Ukraine, within the framework of the national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
for the period 2016-2022, has fostered changes to the
list of military specializations and positions open to
women candidates.

In 2018, the Government of Ukraine updated the
national action plan and integrated some aspects of the
strategy for the prevention of and response to conflict-
related sexual Violence in Ukraine. The action plan,
inter alia, includes education and training programmes
for the security sector on prevention, protection and
response aspects; psychological assistance and a
rehabilitation programme for survivors of conflict-
related sexual violence; and an information campaign
on the prevention of sexual violence.

For the first time, the Government action plan
for 2018 outlined the priority of introducing gender
advisers and gender mainstreaming in higher education
institutions in the security and defence sector. The
Government of Ukraine has enhanced its efforts to
ensure the protection of women's human rights and
women's empowerment in all spheres of public life, as
well as the necessary support for, and reintegration of,
women victims who have suffered from sexual violence
as a result of the Russian aggression.

In that light, I must once again reiterate our regret
at the omission of the reference to the Ukrainian-
Russian armed conflict and its victims in the Secretary-
General's latest thematic report (S/2019/280). In that
regard, we would like to recall our request for a United
Nations special mission to investigate sexual crimes
committed in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine in the context of that conflict.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Ukraine's
commitment to ensuring the full implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda, promoting
women's rights and protecting women from sexual and
gender-based violence.

