Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his statement and the
Russian presidency for organizing today's debate
on a subject that, since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) 16 years ago, has been a priority of the
highest order for France in the Security Council. I
also thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for her
statement and her commitment, and Ms. Rita Lopidia,
for her statement and for her outstanding work as the
head of EVE Organization for Women Development,
South Sudan.

The promotion of women at the United Nations is
not a marketing ploy or a public-relations operation. It
is a fundamental issue in itself, and it is - let us make
no mistake about this - a condition of the success and
effectiveness of the United Nations. This is particularly
true for the women and peace and security agenda,
where we must fulfil our commitments and indeed
make them operational.

Since the adoption of foundational resolution 1325
(2000), seven other resolutions have been adopted by
the Security Council in the context of the women and
peace and security agenda. This topic has emerged
as a major element in the Council's work, in United
Nations agencies and in peacekeeping operations. We
have worked collectively to take greater account of the
situation of women in conflict both to meet the specific
threats to them and protect them and to ensure their full
participation in peacebuilding.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2242 (2015)
one year ago marked the rebuilding of that agenda
and the renewal of our joint commitment. The reform
that began in 2015 is, above all, a political reform.
Resolution 2242 (2015) highlights the need for States to
ensure that women participate more actively in political
processes, peace negotiations and conflict prevention
and resolution mechanisms. States are responsible for
ensuring that women's organizations are included in
discussions on international peace and security, not only
to hear their opinions but also and in particular to allow
them to make a contribution to the discussions. It is also
up to States to appoint more women to decision-making
posts, in particular, within the competent conflict
prevention and resolution structures. That same
responsibility lies with the United Nations, as it appoints
a greater number of women to posts as Special Envoys
or High-level Experts to the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General. This is encouraging but the
practice must become more widespread. During the
first few years of the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, some perhaps viewed
those appointments as symbolic but they should be
seen as effective actions that were taken to promote
international peace and security.

That leads me to the second aspect of the
reform that began 2015, relating to operations. The
increased participation of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is vital and relates both to the number
of women who participate in peacekeeping operations
and the level of their participation in all activities
pertaining to peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Operational planning and the development of mandates
must take those challenges into account at all stages of
the crisis - at the start of conflicts to prevent risks,
in particular by including women in decision-making
processes and conflict prevention policies; and during
conflicts to protect women from violence, in particular
sexual violence and post-conflict, and to assist victims
in rebuilding their lives and by enabling them to fully
participate in rebuilding their country.

That would require close cooperation between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Department
of Field Support and the Department of Political Affairs,
on the one hand, and UN-Women, on the other. Much has
already been done to take into account the dimension
of gender equality in peacekeeping operations.
The mandates of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic have included the relevant
elements of resolutions on women and peace and
security. We must now go even further and streamline
that approach in all peacekeeping operations mandates.
France will continue to work towards that goal. Finally,
the implementation of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security allows for the improved
follow-up of such goals and a more systematic approach
to equality between men and women, with regard
to issues related to international peace and security.
France will play an active part and continue to play its
full role.

France has also set ambitious goals. At the national
level, on 4 March 2015, we adopted a second national
action plan for the period 2015-2018. That plan will be
subject to a mid-term review by civil society over the
next few weeks. In that regard, the French Government
is determined to pursue those efforts on the basis on
commitments made in 2015 within the framework of the
high-level review. The French Government will concern
to act with a View to gaining greater visibility for our
national action plan and to enable a greater number of
women to gain access to high ranking positions related
to peace and stability, in particular, to cite just one
example, with the goal of having 40 per cent of women
at the helm of our diplomatic network by 2018.

At the regional and international levels, we
continue to actively promote the women and peace
and security agenda. Within the European Union, we
implore other member States to systematically include
in their common defence policies the protection of
women in situations of conflict and the promotion of
their role in crisis emergence. I have said that, at the
United Nations, we work with a better understanding of
the agenda within peacekeeping operations mandates.
Within the Group of Seven, we encourage an ambitious
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda with our country partners. Finally, no later
than tomorrow, we are organizing in Paris a high-level
conference on peacekeeping operations in French-
speaking environments, which recalls the importance
of that agenda.

At the same time, we remain committed on the
ground, with more than 900 persons deployed in six
peacekeeping operations, who receive training that
includes human rights and gender equality within
the context of peacekeeping operations. Above and
beyond the strict framework of international peace and
security, France remains fully committed to the United
Nations on the vital issue of violence against women
and, in that regard, along with the Netherlands, we will
present the biannual General Assembly draft resolution
on violence against women.

The holding of today's public debate and its
success illustrates our common interest in promoting
an agenda that is crucial to all of our work on peace
and security. More than ever before, France would like
to play a leading role in this area through its national
public policies in the Security Council and in all
international forums in which our country participates.
The promotion of women at the United Nations is a
daily struggle for us all.

