Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to warmly thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate devoted to the topic
of women refugees and victims of forced displacement.
My delegation would also like to commend Argentina
for promoting the issue of the rights of women in the
Security Council as one of that country's priorities.

This year is the fourteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the Security
Council. The resolution acknowledges the contribution
of women to peace and security, both at the
international and national levels, and promotes their
participation in all aspects of conflict resolution as well
as in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It also urges all
States and United Nations agencies to a wide range of
measures to enhance the participation of women in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts and
promote the respect and protection of their fundamental
rights.

Since 2000, six other resolutions have been adopted
by the Security Council aimed at strengthening the
normative architecture forprotecting the rights of women
before, during and after conflicts. These resolutions
mark a turning point in the international community's
commitment to promoting the participation of women
in peace negotiations and send a clear message against
the endemic and systematic use of sexual violence as a
tactic of war.

Fourteen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), and in spite of the six other Council
resolutions, we must nevertheless conclude that there
is limited progress in their effective implementation.
The report released by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on 20 June notes that
the number of refugees, asylum seekers and internally
displaced persons throughout the world has reached a
record level for the first time since the end of Second
World War - specifically, 51.2 million refugees,
internally displaced persons and asylum seekers.

In 2013 there were 32,000 displaced people every
day, three quarters of whom were women and children.
In addition, the reports reveal that women and girls
are increasingly exposed to a lack of basic services,
humanitarian aid or even official documents. Those
women and girls, in fleeing violence and fighting, find
themselves once again exposed to sexual exploitation,
rape, prostitution, forced marriage or pregnancy,
or forced sterilization. Worse - in the twenty-first
century - they are being auctioned off and sold at the
slave markets. That is reprehensible.

Morocco strongly condemns such barbaric, brutal
and inhumane methods and practices, especially as
they have serious consequences for the establishment
of peace and lasting reconciliation. Such acts of
violence, threats of such acts or incitement to commit
them constitute a serious violation of international
humanitarian and human rights law and a grave breach
of the Geneva Conventions. I would even say they are
a crime against humanity, as women make up half of
humanity.

Helping those women and girls is a major challenge
for the international community, as many of them are
in conflict zones where aid is difficult to deliver and
they do not have the international protection granted to
refugees and internally displaced persons. Applicable
international law holds that States have the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights
of all persons within their territory, and it is within
their jurisdiction to prevent gender-based violence and
respond effectively. At the same time, it is incumbent
on the parties to armed conflict to take all possible
measures to ensure the protection of civilians and
to fulfil their basic needs. Non-State armed groups
undoubtedly represent a major challenge, given their
responsibility in most of the recent armed conflicts,
their involvement in atrocities and massacres of
civilians and their appropriation of humanitarian aid
resources or commandeering of such resources for the
purposes of war.

The Kingdom of Morocco believes that the best
protection is based on full respect for refugees' basic
rights, regardless of their status. That is a primary,
noble and fundamental aspect of human rights, which
should be the bedrock ofinternational protection. Those
fundamental rights include, on a priority basis, that of
free return to the country of origin in safety and dignity
and resettlement or integration.

Similarly, registering refugees becomes particularly
important in that it allows them to ensure the protection
and enjoyment of their fundamental rights. Registration
and identification programmes can also have a positive
impact on the empowerment of refugee women.

In conclusion, let me highlight the following
elements.First,strongpoliticalwillandtotalcommitment
by Member States to the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) will allow for active participation by women
in national, regional and international institutions for
the prevention, protection and management of conflict
situations. Secondly, the militarization of refugee
camps is a gross violation of human rights that makes
the distinction between combatants and non-combatants
difficult and hinders the work of humanitarian actors.
Thirdly, women refugees and internally displaced
persons should be informed of the fundamental, legal,
security and material rights offered by their country
of origin. Fourthly, I would highlight the importance
of ensuring broad participation by all refugee and
internally displaced women in decision-making bodies
in refugee or internally displaced communities. Fifthly,
there is a need to increase the funding necessary to
ensuring comprehensive multisectoral responses, such
as the availability of medical and legal of services that
are essential for the empowerment of women in conflict
and post-conflict situations.

