Ms. Taylor: I thank the Security Council for the
invitation to speak here today and to continue the
valuable practice of engaging and hearing from civil
society. I am speaking on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, a coalition of
international civil society organizations formed in 2000
to advocate for a Security Council resolution on
women, peace and security. With the adoption of
resolutions 1325 (2000) in October 2000 and 1820
(2008) in June of this year, we now advocate for the
full and effective implementation of those resolutions
and for the particular concerns of women in conflict-
affected situations to be addressed consistently and
substantively by the United Nations system and by
Member States.

Eight years since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), there has been a great deal more talk about the
protection and promotion of women's human rights in
conflict-affected situations. There has been much
progress across a broad range of issues, and many new
actors are now positively engaged in driving forward
this agenda. However, in many areas action and
implementation have been inconsistent.

It is now necessary to move from words to action.
It is now necessary to move from ad hoc approaches,
and towards ensuring that the intentions reflected in
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) become a
systematic and regular part of the work of the Security
Council, of the United Nations system and of all
Member States.

In resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
was certainly quite clear in its intentions regarding
women's participation. It stressed

"the importance of [women's] their equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts
for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security, and the need to increase their role in
decision-making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution". (resolution 1325 (2000), fifth preambular paragraph)

It recognized that women's "protection and full
participation in the peace process can significantly
contribute to the maintenance and promotion of
international peace and security" (tenth preambular paragraph).

That commitment to women's full and equal
participation is more than an abstract concept. To
discharge this mandate requires concrete action.
Concrete action is required to ensure women's right to
actively participate at all levels of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Concrete action is
also required to address the substantive issues that
women in specific country situations identify as
priority concerns.

The NGO Working Group takes this opportunity
today to focus on three critical areas deserving
particular attention: first, the underrepresentation of
women in peace processes; secondly, the
underrepresentation of women in the United Nations
system; and thirdly, the need to ensure that women are
fully involved in the design and implementation of
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration
and resettlement (DDRRR) programmes.

To the first point, as regards peace processes,
recent statistics compiled by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) are
staggering and bear repeating. Since 2000, women
constituted, on average, 7 per cent of the negotiators in
five major United Nations peace processes. Fewer than
3 per cent of the signatories in 13 peace talks were
women. It is not enough to acknowledge the right of
women to participate in peace processes. Mediators
and negotiators, and donor Governments, must address
the very real obstacles to women's physical presence at
the negotiation table and in behind-the-scenes or after-
hours negotiations. For example, in practice, women in
such situations are often not members of the warring
parties coming to the table, and many will not have
access to the resources made available to those parties.
Women may have family obligations that men do not
have. In order, then, to participate on an equal footing
with men, women may need support for childcare, they
may need money for transportation and
accommodation, and they may need help with their
personal security.
While there have been some important initiatives
by UNIFEM. and by others - in northern Uganda, for
example - to pay attention to these issues and to
support women, the support needs to be systematic and
needs to be integrated in all peace processes. Within
the United Nations system, the Department of Political

Affairs (DPA) is a key player. But, the lack of a funded
and well-supported gender adviser unit in that
department is limiting. Gender units in other entities,
such as the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
have proven a positive influence. It has now been four
years since the Secretary-General recommended the
establishment of such a gender unit in DPA, and we
look forward to Member States helping that happen.
We also look forward to progress being made on the
creation of a well-resourced women-specific United
Nations entity with the capacity and the presence at the
operational level to further drive these efforts.

As to the second point, United Nations efforts to
help ensure women's participation in peace processes
must also take place at home, which brings me to the
issue of leadership within the United Nations. Women
are dramatically underrepresented in the 30 missions of
the United Nations and should be appointed to more
leadership positions. The new appointments to posts of
deputy special representative of the Secretary-General
are laudable. However, it is unacceptable that those are
some of the only examples of appointments of women
in high-level leadership. It is also unacceptable that the
all-female police contingent in Liberia is seen as such a
novelty. In addition to reforms needed at the national
level to enable more women to participate in these
United Nations missions, there should also be a clear
and transparent process for Member States to submit
names of women to the Secretary-General for
appointments to high-level posts.

The presence of women at the field level,
particularly in leadership, encourages other women and
girls to participate and lead; it demonstrates that
peacekeeping missions are committed to including all
voices; and it is shown to both decrease sexual and
gender-based violence and to increase the reporting of
occurrences of sexual violence. Sexual violence is not
an issue disconnected from the issue of participation.
The stark reality is that those affected by or living in
fear of sexual violence are less able to participate in
political processes and have less access to the justice
system. Member States must increase the number of
women in the judiciary and legal professions in
conflict-affected situations as a means of increasing
women's access to justice and ending impunity for
sexual and gender-based violence.

In Afghanistan, for example, the Government, the
United Nations and donors must direct the necessary
resources to meet the benchmarks of the National

Action Plan for the Women in Afghanistan on women's
participation in official bodies. Impunity for violence,
in particular sexual violence, is directly counter to the
rule of law and thus, ultimately, to peace.

The link between violence and participation then
is also relevant in key processes in the transition from
conflict, which brings me to our third area of concern.

A short survey of recently ended conflicts shows
that women's issues are more often than not neglected
in conflict-transformation policies, such as those
related to the rule of law and justice reform. In these
conflict-transformation processes, continued violence
against women essentially means a continuation of the
conflict, sometimes even with the same weapons.
Often, laws passed as part of reconstruction do not
prioritize the issue of small arms and violence against
women, and do not recognize that gun-related domestic
violence increases during and after conflict. When
DDRRR issues are raised during negotiations, it should
be seen as an opportunity to recognize the impact of
these laws on women and to recognize that these laws
can break the continuing cycle of violence against
women and ensure their meaningful participation in the
transformation of their society.

That is what the commitments of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) are about: the
transformation of society. It is now eight years after
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted by consensus in
this Council Chamber, and women need to see results.
By working to ensure the creation of a well-funded
gender unit in DPA and the appointment of women to
senior United Nations leadership positions, and to
ensure that reconstruction legislation takes women into
account, the Council will be taking concrete action to
ensure women are truly present in all aspects of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Finally, the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security thanks Council members for their
time and attention here today. As they move forward
with their daily work in the Security Council, with
their daily work as States Members of the United
Nations and at the national level, and with their daily
work within the United Nations system, members
should ask themselves these three questions: Where are
the women? Why are they not part of these processes?
What can I do to change this?

