Ms. Tufiez (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing this debate. We emphasize the fact that this
debate is being held at the same time as the ongoing
session of the Women's Legal and Social Commission.

Argentina considers that the fight against trafficking
in persons and forced labor must be comprehensive,
since it includes a multiplicity of actors at various levels,
and that it must be waged within the framework of the
defence and promotion of human rights. We therefore
believe it appropriate for such topics to be addressed as
a matter of priority by the General Assembly.

In that context, Argentina maintains a strong
commitment to the fight against human trafficking as
the most extreme form of violence. We are committed
at the multilateral level and promote national policies
to eliminate this scourge. At the national level, in 2013
we established the Executive Committee for Combating
Trafficking and Exploitation of Persons and for the
Protection and Assistance of Victims. Also, in July
2016 we convened for the first time the Federal Council
for Combating Trafficking, which I have the honor
of coordinating, with the aim of designing a federal
strategy to eradicate human trafficking and the sexual
exploitation of women in prostitution.

These concrete actions demonstrate the political
will of the State to address the various dimensions of
the scourge of human trafficking. Based on the new
international consensus reached in September 2015
with the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its 17 Goals and corresponding
targets, all States pledged under Goal 8.7 to

"[t]ake immediate and effective measures to
eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and
human trafficking and secure the prohibition and
elimination of the worst forms of child labour".

With regard to forced labour, Argentina supports
the initiative of Alliance 8.7, promoted by the United
Kingdom, and is among those countries that have
been part of it since its inception. Argentina is also a
member of the Group of Friends of Decent Work for
Sustainable Development, created in 2014. Child labour
is strongly linked to forced labour, according to data
from the International Labour Organization. Of the
21 million annual victims of forced labour, 5.5 million
are children, in flagrant violation of article 32 of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.

In line with Argentina's historic commitment to
combating child labour, next November, along with the
International Labour Organization, Argentina will host
the fourth Global Conference on Child Labour, whose
theme will be eliminating child labour and forced
labour and the generation of quality jobs for youth.

Finally, with regard to the relationship between
trafficking in persons and forced labour and terrorism,
Argentina had the honor of co-facilitating, along with
Iceland, General Assembly resolution 70/291, entitled
"The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review", which expresses concern that in
some regions terrorists may benefit from transnational
organized crime, including trafficking in persons.
Argentina reiterates its renewed commitment to
combating trafficking in persons, forced labour and
all forms of slavery in every situation, as well as the
need for this issue to continue to be addressed at the
General Assembly.

