Ms. Bokhari (Norway): I am honoured to be
making this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own
country, Norway. I would like to thank all the previous
speakers, and not least Ms. Lopidia for her powerful
statement reminding us all of why we are here.

The eighth resolution, resolution 2242 (2015), on
women and peace and security was adopted at last year's
open debate (see S/PV.7533). Never before had so many
countries sponsored a Security Council resolution.
Never before had so many statements been made. We
made commitments; we created expectations and we
were right to do so, because by then we knew what we
used to just believe. Where women are included and can
exert an influence, we are more likely to reach a peace
agreement and the peace is more likely to last. Where
women are involved in peacekeeping, the operation
enjoys more trust and is more effective. Where there is
political will, sexual violence can be addressed, even in
humanitarian crises.

Yet, in spite of our knowledge and experience, in
spite of our commitments, we still have a long way
to go. Women are still excluded from many processes
that will decide their future. Women are still suffering
abuse and even being targeted directly. We are still
not tapping into the resources of 50 per cent of our
populations when it matters the most. But steps have
been taken. We welcome the new Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security that briefs
the Security Council, and we welcome the national
focal points network that has been formed to ensure
greater accountability. We welcome UN-Women's new
flagship on women and peace and security. And on the
ground, in spite of the challenges ahead, the Colombia
process has raised the bar.

From now on, women will expect to take part. Civil
society will demand to be heard. More stakeholders
will want to have a say, because it has been done before.
And even though the Syria talks are not moving in the
direction we hoped, the Geneva process has achieved
something new: women and civil society are consulted
regularly through innovative formal mechanisms. We
now have very concrete examples of inclusion. We have
been very happy to support these developments.

Inspired by a South African initiative, a Nordic
network of women mediators was launched in November
last year in Oslo. This means that Nordic women now
form a part of a global network of women mediators,
whose experience and competence we should draw on
in future peace and security operations. To refer to the
lack of competent women is no longer a viable excuse.

Finland and Norway are also cooperating with
the Department of Political Affairs on the training of
senior United Nations mediators. As sustaining peace
is coming to the forefront of the United Nations peace
and security efforts, the Nordic countries are working
to ensure that the women and peace and security agenda
is at the heart of this effort. Importantly, as we work
to prevent and counter violent extremism, we support
women's organizations and youth networks, because
we believe that they are key players. We listen to them
in our policy development and support them through
concrete programmes. The Norwegian Prime Minister
recently launched a new dialogue forum for women
peacemakers on the front lines of violent extremism
and policymakers at the highest level. Training is
crucial to raise awareness and improve implementation
of the gender aspects of peacekeeping missions. That is
why the Nordic countries established the Nordic Centre
for Gender in Military Operations. In September, the
Swedish Armed Forces issued a handbook for gender
mainstreaming in operations, the very first of its kind.

In this context, we would also like to express our
strong support for the proposal by Spain and the United
Kingdom regarding a framework for a strengthened
Gender Advisory/Women, Peace and Security Unit in
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support. This would enhance the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in both the short- and the long-term perspectives.

The Nordic countries deploy many women to
United Nations peace operations: 35 per cent of the
police officers deployed by Norway and 50 per cent
of those deployed by Sweden are women and 40 per
cent of all personnel Finland sends to Civilian crisis
management operations are women. Women made up
50 per cent of the experts deployed by the Icelandic
Crisis Response Unit last year. This is because we
know that gender balance makes our contingents better.
We also support the African Union and several African
countries in their endeavours to train more women and
to ensure that their police forces are gender responsive.

Sexual violence destroys both individuals
and communities and it undermines peace and
development. That is why the Nordic countries are
focusing on preventing and combating such atrocities.
We are engaged in the Call to Action on Protection
from Gender-based Violence in Emergencies, which
is currently led by Sweden. We work with the African
Union and we support United Nations action, Justice
Rapid Response and civil society.

The Nordic countries will continue to promote the
1325 (2000) agenda wherever there are discussions
about peace and security, because we want peace and
we want a peace that lasts.

