Mr. Krishnasswamy (India): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on the agenda
item "Women and peace and security". I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN Women and the other briefers for their detailed
remarks.

The resolution of armed conflict situations
requires a holistic and sustainable approach. The
participation of women in peace processes and post-
conflict reconstruction efforts is necessary to lay the
foundation for lasting peace. In that regard, resolution
1325 (2000) and successive Council resolutions on
this issue have provided a framework for effective
institutional arrangements. As the Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/525) points out, significant progress has
been made but much more needs to be done.

India is one of the leading contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Based on our broad
experience, we believe that the Security Council must
make resources available to implement the greater scope
of peacekeeping mandates, including by providing
more women protection advisers. India was the first
State to successfully deploy an all-women police force
as part of United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
hope that more Member States will contribute a greater
number of women military and police personnel to
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

We have taken note of the indicators proposed
in the Secretary-General's report. Indicators can be
useful in assessing situations as countries move from
situations of armed conflict to conflict resolution and
from peacebuilding to post-conflict reconstruction. We
must recognize, however, the difficulties in obtaining
credible and verifiable information from armed
conflict zones. It would be useful to have further
discussions before adopting such indicators to ensure
their relevance and efficiency.

We firmly believe that capacity-building should
be a main focus of United Nations efforts. In order to
ensure sustainable peace and stability, State institutions,
including in the area of security, the rule of law and
justice, need to be strengthened. National Governments
have the primary responsibility for prosecuting and
deterring violence against women, including sexual
violence. As affected States re-embark on the process
ofrebuilding their countries, including by consolidating
democratic ideals and practices and making effective
improvements to socioeconomic conditions, the United
Nations and the international community must step up
and sustain their support to them.

We would urge caution in going beyond the
mandates given by the Security Council in the reports
submitted to it. It will be useful to remind ourselves
that the women, peace and security agenda evolved
from the imperative to address the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on women, including the
abhorrent practice of sexual violence against women as
an instrument of war.

The general recommendation in the report of the
Secretary-General to incorporate into that agenda
other thematic areas - such as countering terrorism,
transnational organized crime, natural resources and
others - not only has implications for the division of
work and responsibilities between the Security Council
and the General Assembly, but also has the potential
to dilute significant United Nations work being done
in the area of women, peace and security and in other
thematic areas.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm India's commitment
to contributing positively to the consolidation of United
Nations efforts in the area ofwomen, peace and security.

