Ms. Diop (spoke in French): Allow me to echo
Ms. Amina Mohammed in congratulating you, Madam
Minister, on Sweden's assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. I Wish you every success during
your term.

I would also like to seize this opportunity to
thank His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who
wholeheartedly lent his support to the joint mission of
the United Nations, the African Union and Sweden that
has just concluded under the leadership of Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General, with the
effective participation of Ms. Wallstrom.

The mission is at the heart of our meeting this
morning. It fits perfectly alongside the call for action
of the African Women Leaders Network, which is a
movement of women working in all sectors of society,
including among young women and women from rural
areas. It is a movement that aims to mobilize efforts to
transform Africa and thereby contribute to a prosperous
and peaceful Africa. The Network is supported by the
United Nations and the African Union through the
Office of the Special Envoy and UN-Women, as well as
the Federal Republic of Germany.

It is often said that there is no peace and security
without development, and no development without
peace. But it can also be said that there is no peace,
security and development without the effective
participation of women. If further proof of that
were needed, the mission of solidarity that we have
just carried out in South Sudan, Chad and the Niger
highlighted once again the poignant realities of women
and girls who suffer the effects of deprivation that
arise from the abundance of attention that States must
pay to military security to combat radicalization and
violent extremism.

As members of the Council know, the Lake Chad
and Sahel regions are being hit by the full force of
the extremists of Boko Haram and other radicalized
groups. Faced with that threat, which is so grave that
it can endanger a State, such as Mali, the States of the
region have mobilized to fight that evil, which strikes
indiscriminately and across borders. For those States,
the resources of which are already among the most
meagre in the world, security efforts have no impact
on investments in social structures, and consequently
there is a weak response in meeting the needs of their
people. In the Lake Chad region, success against Boko
Haram has led to the return of many young people who
now, unfortunately, find themselves unemployed, feel
abandoned and, as such, fall easy prey to the return of
radicalized groups.

In the Niger, we have seen the devastating effects
of poverty and the lack of opportunity for families,
and their impact on young people, especially young
women and, may I say, on children becoming child
brides, which leads not just to physical but also to
mental trauma. I have long travelled through conflict
zones. I have seen atrocities committed by armed
groups - girls and young boys raped, for example.
Nevertheless, in the region that we visited, an issue
that particularly marked me was that of child marriage,
with its consequences of bodies completely battered
by fistulas, as well as the ostracization, stigmatization
and abandonment of those children. The only clinic
available in the entire region, where the majority of
the people are women and the majority of those women
are under 18 years old, had only one doctor to attend
to the harm done to the bodies of those young girls.
It is true that the practice of early marriage existed
before the rise of radicalization, but the exacerbation
of poverty among families displaced by conflict seems
to have pushed them to give their daughters away to
arranged marriages, the consequences of which include
the girls giving birth far too early and them suffering
from broken bodies and spirits. They are abandoned by
society. Is that not a recipe for them to turn towards
radicalization and violent extremism?

Alongside the troubling reality of the effects of
conflicts on women and youth, our mission was also
saw the resilience of women and their determination
to contribute to the search for solutions. In Chad,
religious women leaders, as Ms. Amina Mohammed
mentioned, shared with us their innovative strategies
at the community level to prevent the radicalization of
young people and to meet the threats posed by armed
groups, such as Boko Haram. They focus their efforts
on the education of children, above all young girls, who
then become active agents against violent extremism.
They seek to convey an inclusive interpretation of the
Koran with a view to promoting dialogue for peace. We
will support Chad as it seeks to implement its national
action plan under resolution 1325 (2000), including on
issues related to the prevention of and fight against
violent extremism through the gender perspective.

In the Niger, women used the national action plan
under resolution 1325 (2000) as a tool for their voices
to be heard in decision-making processes on peace,
security and development in the country. Women
are undeniably victims of violence, whether directly
linked to conflicts or as victims of practices that are
exacerbated by conflicts. Women are also agents of
change in spearheading initiatives to respond to the
challenges facing them. The efforts of those women
in their communities show that the response to the
security challenges faced by the regions that we have
just visited require investment in the development of
individuals so as to prevent radicalization and violent
extremism, which has become the scourge of the
Sahel. That underpins the importance of investing in
education, as well as the need to build the capacities of
women and youth by providing them with employment
opportunities. They called for a more sustained
presence of the State and the international community
to meet the basic needs of health care, water and food,
the lack of which is often harnessed by extremist
groups to attract to their cause certain marginalized
factions of the population. It is indeed better to prevent
than to cure.

I welcome the leadership of Senegal in steering
the first Security Council debate on water, peace and
security, which took place in November 2016 (see S/PV.7818). Ourjoint mission of the African Union, the
United Nations and Sweden once again underscored the
key role that water plays in our society.

Allow me to take this opportunity to commend,
from this rostrum, the efforts undertaken by Chad and
the Niger in the fight against violent extremism, which,
as I mentioned earlier, leads to exclusion and poverty
in the affected regions and only further entrenches the
cycle of violence. It is important that those efforts be
supported by the international community in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
above all to ensure that security does not come at the
expense of the peoples' needs.

There are already initiatives, such as the
coordination platform of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which brings together the
majority of stakeholders for the benefit of the
countries and communities in the Sahel to mobilize
resources and define regional priorities. The African
Union also established a strategy for the Sahel region,
which was adopted by the Peace and Security Council.
We have also recently set up another programme,
together with the Economic Community of West
African States and the Lake Chad Basin, which is aimed
at strengthening the capacities of the Multinational
Joint Task Force. However, resources remain limited
and continue to be directed more to military actions
than to meeting the needs of the people.

Before concluding this statement, I would like
to share some recommendations that I believe are
important and that have emerged from our visit to the
Sahel region.

First, the fight for security in the countries
concerned can be won by meeting the needs of the
people, especially women and young people, who
are victims but who have also demonstrated their
determination to address the challenges they face.
But they cannot do it alone. I therefore appeal to the
international community to step up its aid.

Secondly, prevention is needed, including through
sizeable investments in education, the management of
natural resources such as water, job creation and the
protection of women and young girls and promotion of
their role and leadership in the search for peace.

Women should the first partners of choice. Each
woman must be empowered to be able to say "no" to
conflict, "no" to early marriage and "no" to extremism.
Women must be able to read the Qur'an and convey the
message of peace contained therein to their children. I
welcome the fact that the political leaders that we met
during our mission reassured us of their determination
to make women and young people the drivers of
political and economic change in their countries.
Indeed, peace and security efforts will be successful
only when we take robust action to defend the nexus
of peace, security and development and to integrate
the gender perspective in our instruments for conflict
prevention and resolution. That is what women and the
African people are expecting from the Council.

