Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I thank the Presiden, for
organizing this meeting under the Jordanian presidency.
I would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zainab Bangura and Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin of Nigeria for their briefings.

We commend the attention devoted by the Council
to the issue of sexual violence in conflict, and the
efforts of Special Representative Bangura. We also
support the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. The efforts
made so far to tackle the immense challenge at hand
deserve appreciation. Nevertheless, the severe effects
of conflicts on women and girls, as well as on other
vulnerable groups, in various regions of the world
continue to constitute a significant problem that needs
to be addressed.

Seventy years after the foundation of the United
Nations, the elimination of conflict and related
violence stands out as a challenge that the international
community has yet to meet, So long as conflicts exist,
pursuing the elimination of sexual Violence in conflict
in isolation cannot yield the desired results. The new
complexities surrounding the changing nature of
conflicts create an even more worrisome development.
The challenges we collectively face today include a
growing number of intra-State conflicts, protracted
crises, humanitarian emergencies, the emergence of
violent extremist groups across a broad geographical
area and the effects of inhumane terrorist acts. The
international community should pay particular
attention to strategies for preventing and responding to
sexual-based violence, which is often used as a weapon
of war and as a strategy to deprive human beings of
their most basic rights - namely, their safety, security
and dignity. Such crimes should not go unrecorded and
unpunished. To prevent sexual violence in conflicts we
must end impunity for both the perpetrators and for
those in the chain of command. Punishment for crimes
often serves as a deterrent.

In the face of the threats and needs faced by
civilians, a stronger and more inclusive approach, in
line with the goals and objectives set by resolution 1325
(2000), is required.

First, strengthening our political will to achieve
gender equality, the empowerment of women and girls
and recognition of their human rights is a necessary
step. As we embark upon a process to develop a set
of sustainable development goals for the post-2015
development agenda, we believe that gender equality
and the empowerment of women should be at the centre
ofall our solutions and commitments. That will also help
further our agenda on women and peace and security.
Ending violence against women is a part of this effort.
The Council of Europe's Convention on Preventing
and Combating Violence Against Women, known as
the Istanbul Convention, stands out as a landmark
document in this regard. Turkey is committed to foster
the objectives of the Convention and stands ready to
share its own experiences in its implementation.

Secondly, the horrific acts perpetrated by terrorist
organizations such as Daesh, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabab require a comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy. In that vein, eliminating the root causes of the
conflict is essential.

Thirdly, ensuring a comprehensive approach to
decision-making and policy, as well as peace processes,
mediation efforts, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
are another important step. Women's meaningful
participation in those cycles has the potential to ensure
better early-warning systems, ending impunity for
sexual Violence-related crimes and stronger deterrence
and prevention strategies.
Lastly, broadening the gender perspectives in the
United Nations system's normative and operational
frameworks, entities and practices will enhance the
effectiveness of its actions in responding to conflict-
related sexual Violence, and help address the special
needs of women and girls in humanitarian emergencies
and protracted crises.

I will not take the Council's time by responding to
one delegation's renewed, baseless allegations, which
we categorically deny.

As the crisis in Syria enters its fifth year, millions
of Syrians, particularly women and girls, continue to
live under the threat of sexual Violence. I would like to
mention some of the best practices we have implemented
to tackle sexual violence in conflicts, based on our
experience in responding to the forced displacement of
Syrians and Iraqis due the tragedies in their countries.

In terms of participation, we are giving priority
to women's participation in the temporary protection
centres, with their inclusion in both decision-making
and administration. Regarding protection, an adequate
number of women staff is employed in the centres to
maintain quality health, education and security services
for women and girls. On prevention, special measures
are in place to prevent assaults within the centres and
to protect vulnerable groups. Outside the centres,
measures are taken to promote the monitoring and
prevention of domestic and sexual Violence. In terms
of empowerment, the enrolment of girls in schooling
and continuing education for women remains a priority
policy.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support to international, regional and national efforts
to end conflict-related sexual Violence and to respond
to its consequences.

