Mr. Ahmad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this very important meeting. This year marks
the seventieth anniversary of the creation of the United
Nations, which has made the preservation of humankind
from the horrors of war its highhest priority. The
Organization has given the people of the world the hope
that they can live in peace and security. Unfortunately,
however, the past 70 years have clearly shown that the
United Nations has been unable to meet the aspirations
of its founders, despite the wealth of experience it has
accumulated over the years.

Although 16 years have passed since the Security
Council started its periodic set of debates on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, experience
has shown that the protection of civilians continues
to be exploited in a selective way based on a policy of
double standards. It is being used for schemes that run
counter to the fundamental rules of international law.
It is enough here to recall the unjustified, unacceptable
manoeuvres that have led to the violation of the
integrity of Libya as a State, people and territory, under
the pretext of protecting those very same Libyans. My
delegation would like to reaffirm the following points.

First, conflict prevention should be undertaken with
a view to finding compromise and peaceful solutions to
conflicts before they escalate, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. It
is only in that manner that we will be able to protect
civilians, including women and girls, and save them
from the horrors of war.

Secondly, the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians against the dangers that they
may be exposed to, including the threats of terrorism,
lies with the relevant State, the only party that has the
right to maintain stability and security throughout its
territory.

Thirdly, civilians in armed conflict cannot be
fully protected without unwavering compliance with
international law and the provisions of the United
Nations Charter, including the principle of sovereignty.
sovereign equality, and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States.

Fourthly, a discretionary approach to protecting
civilians is unacceptable, as it transforms the protection
of civilians into a tool to serve the policies and interests
of influential States to the detriment of the sovereignty,
stability and independence of other Member States. The
exploitation by some members and non-members of this
Council of the concept of the protection of civilians to
impose their selective policies and double standards on
the Council can only undermine the role mandated to it
by Charter of the United Nations.

Fifthly, a comprehensive approach to the protection
of civilians is necessary to remedy all those concerns
that could pose a danger to them, including by putting
an end to unilateral coercive measures of which the
United Nations has already affirmed the illegitimacy
in this era of globalization. I refer here to measures
imposed by certain States upon other States, including
Syria, that harms their people by depriving them of the
means of subsistence, including food, medicine and
fuel, and by compelling them to seek refuge abroad, and
consequently fall prey to gangsters, human traffickers
and other horrors.

My delegation reaffirms the need to protect the
civilians sufferingt under Israeli occupation, including
in the occupied Syrian Golan and other occupied Arab
territories. We need to put an end to the practices of the
Israeli occupation. Israel believes that it enjoys impunity
because the Council has not responded to violations of
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and other international instruments against
terrorism. It therefore pursues its aggressive policies
with full impunity and continues to support to terrorist
groups active in the separation zone in the Syrian
Golan, thereby threatening peace and security in the
region and beyond.

In their statements, numerous speakers have
underscored the great suffering of Syrian women and
girls. Many of these speakers, however, simply ignore
the fact that the main reason for the plight of Syrian
women, who are subject to all forms of persecution
and inhumane treatment such as human trafficking
by terrorist organizations, lies in the policies of
Governments that back terrorism.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
reiterates its call on the Security Council to meet its
Charter responsibilities by condemning the terrorism
from which all Syrians - men, women, children and
the elderly - are suffering. States that back terrorism
must end their destructive practices, which are a grave
violation of international law and international counter-
terrorism instruments - including resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014), as well as the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy - and pose a threat to international
peace and security.

My delegation reaffirms that all counter-terrorism
measures must be coordinated with the Syrian
Government while respecting its sovereignty. In
this regard, we wish to highlight that the so-called
international coalition has recently carried out a number
of air raids targeting a centre for the deaf and mute in
the province of Raqqa, depriving many special-needs
individuals of access to its services. The same air raids
also destroyed a number of other economic centres.

