Mr. Swe (Myanmar): First of all, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for the initiative you have taken in
convening today's open debate on women and peace
and security.

It has now been five years since the Security
Council adopted the landmark resolution 1325 (2000).
By means of that resolution the international
community chose to see women not merely as victims
in conflict situations, but as active participants in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. The 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
gives an added impetus to that notion by recognizing
the importance of providing women with the
opportunity for equal participation and full
involvement in efforts to maintain and promote peace
and security.

Women and girls are among those who suffer
most in armed conflicts. Therefore, they have a strong
desire for peace and security and yearn to take an
active part in the peace process.

The underlying causes of conflicts are many and
varied. In most cases, poverty, socio-economic and
gender inequalities and underdevelopment are its root
causes. In the case of my country, a union made up of
more than 100 national races, the weakness of the
constitution that was imposed upon us at the time of
independence was the main cause of conflict. Because
of that weakness, Myanmar had to face armed
insurgencies barely a few months after we had regained
our sovereignty in 1948. It was only recently that we
were able to achieve national reconciliation, and 17
insurgent groups came back to the legal fold. Their
representatives have now joined other delegates in the
national convention that is laying down the principles
of our new constitution - a constitution that will be
acceptable to all nationalities of the Union. I am happy
to say that the women of Myanmar are taking active
part in the national convention.

Resolution 1325 (2000) also contains the
important component of ensuring the protection of and
respect for the human rights of women and girls. In
Myanmar, the Government was instrumental in
establishing the Myanmar Women's Affairs Federation
and has been actively implementing policies to
promote and protect the rights of women and girls.

I wish to commend the Secretary-General for
submitting an action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security throughout the United Nation system. I have
noted that the action plan contains strategic
programmes as well as quick-impact strategies. We are
happy to see that the plan is structured around 12
important areas of action. We are particularly pleased
that preventing and responding to sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations staff, related personnel
and United Nations partners is included as one of those
action areas.

Myanmar's values, tradition and culture abhor the
sexual exploitation of women. We therefore strongly
support the implementation of a zero-tolerance policy.
We are also happy to see that the action plan includes
accountability machinery.

I am confident that the action plan and the
recommendations contained in the report, as well as the
Peacebuilding Commission established by the 2005
world summit, will contribute meaningfully to the
promotion of the role of women as envisioned in
resolution 1325 (2000).
