Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We would like to join
others in condemning the terrorist attacks that took
place in Ankara and Berlin yesterday. We express our
deep condolences to the Russian Federation and to
Germany.

Kazakhstan aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Kingdom of
Bahrain on behalf of the 24 States members of the
Group of Friends United against Human Trafficking.

We commend the tireless efforts and special
expertise of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and other relevant United Nations
system organizations. We also value UNODC's able
coordination of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons and sound management
of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. We support strengthened coordination
between the Inter-Agency Coordination Group and
Member States to enhance the effectiveness of the
response to the current challenges ofhuman trafficking.

We reaffirm our commitment to the landmark
United Nations Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Persons, as well as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and
Children, supplementing the Convention to direct
coordinated and inclusive responses. We therefore call
upon Member States to universalize the ratification of
all relevant anti-trafficking legal instruments.

The threat posed by terrorist organizations is a
matter of special concern for Kazakhstan. General
Assembly resolution, 70/291 on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review, recognized
the nexus between trafficking in persons and
terrorism. Human trafficking is a critical component
of the financial flows of terrorist groups and money-
laundering by organized crime networks, which pose
a threat to international peace and security. Hence, we
urge States to mobilize a stronger and more vigilant
global response.

We believe that it is critical and mandatory to
train all peacekeeping and other personnel deployed in
conflict and post-conflict zones to respond effectively
to trafficking in persons, with training in gender
sensitivity and prevention of sexual exploitation and
abuse, especially those perpetuated by peacekeepers.
Peace and development are the foundations of stable
society and human well-being, and need enormous
resources for poverty eradication, education,
employment and provision of services. Kazakhstan
has therefore proposed that Member States consider
allocating annually 1 per cent of their defence budget
to the United Nations Sustainable Development
Goals Fund.

At the national level, Kazakhstan is addressing
human trafficking by accelerating the work of
its interagency commission, in close interaction
with non-governmental organizations and relevant
international organizations as part of the fourth cycle
of its 2015-2017 national plan.

At the regional level, we interact in an effective
manner with the Commonwealth of Independent States
through its 2014-2018 regional programme and with
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) as a part of the OSCE Alliance against
Trafficking in Persons. Kazakhstan has also initiated
the Almaty Process, which serves as a platform for
nine countries of the region to annually step up their
response and enhance cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration.

As an incoming non-permanent member of the
Security Council for 2017-2018, Kazakhstan is pleased
to support resolution 2331 (2016) and reaffirms its
strong commitment to reaching visible results in
combating trafficking in human beings.

