Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, I should like
to express my appreciation for the holding of this open
debate.
Japan concurs and associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict. I should like to focus on
the aspect of women's empowerment under conflict and
post-conflict settings.

Everyone caught living under the conditions of
armed conflict suffers, but that suffering is spread
unevenly. The fact is, in general, that women and girls
suffer significantly more. They suffer more because
women and girls are too often targeted directly as
pawns in some of the more insidious tactics of war.
They suffer more because they are more susceptible
to rape, forced marriage, forced prostitution and other
sexual and gender-based violence. Therefore, there
are inherent needs and challenges to the protection of
women and girls that require special consideration in
the process of conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. That is precisely why women must
participate in decision-making in such processes.

In that regard, it is absolutely crucial to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). As we explained in the open
debate ofthe Security Council on women and peace and
security in October (see S/PV.7289), the Government
of Japan and Japanese civil society have been working
together earnestly to develop our national action plan
on women and peace and security. It is expected that we
will be able to launch our plan very soon.

I should like to emphasize the aspect of women
as active agents in society, especially in post-conflict
settings, rather than women as objects ofprotection. Too
often women are seen simply as vulnerable beings who
are passively dependent upon the protection of others.
However, the fact is that women play many positive
and active roles in society, and their contributions are
absolutely indispensable. It is often the very structure
of society, especially in conflict and post-conflict
settings, that hinders women's capability to flourish.
However, under suitable conditions women can shine.

Policy implementation with sufficient budgeting
is crucial for removing obstacles that hinder women
from flourishing. Two years ago before the General
Assembly (see A/68/PV.12), the Prime Minister of
Japan, Mr. Shinzo Abe, pledged the implementation
of official development assistance (ODA) in excess
of $3 billion over the three years from 2013 to 2015,
towards women's empowerment and gender equality.
We have already implemented approximately
$1.8 billion of that pledge. Let me mention some of the
projects implemented through that assistance.
In November 2014, Japan began contributing
to a project, implemented by the United Nations
Development Programme in cooperation with NATO
and the Government of Turkey, that is training
approximately 200 female Afghan police officers at
the Sivas Police Training Centre in Turkey. As part
of that project, in December of last year the Japan
International Cooperation Agency sent three experts
to hold a three-day workshop on empowering those
officers to improve their ability to tackle gender-based
violence.

Japan has been assisting female internally displaced
persons and refugees from the Syrian conflict, mainly
in Jordan, in achieving economic self-reliance through
a project implemented by UN-Women in response to
that crisis. We employ the cash-for-work method, which
involves hiring internally displaced and refugee women
for reconstruction projects in order to foster economic
recovery and self-reliance. The project has already
provided short-term employment for 950 female
refugees, and will further provide skills-training to 300
women towards their greater economic self-reliance.

In conclusion, both the special needs and the
empowerment of women in conflict and post-conflict
settings are the two main pillars in the field ofwomen and
peace and security. In order to address this issue more
effectively, I believe that the implementation of policy
should be guided by the principle of human security,
which focuses on the well-being of every individual
and seeks to build societies in which everyone can live
with dignity by protecting and empowering individuals
and communities. Japan implements its ODA projects
in the spirit of human security, and I believe that this
approach will help us a lot.

