Mr. Wittig: Last year the Security Council
recognized that the Secretary-General's 2009 report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) was an important contribution to a more
effective and coherent international response to post-
conflict peacebuilding. The Council also saw the
continued engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) as the Secretary-General embarked
on the implementation of his ambitious agenda for
action. While a number of recommendations made by
the Secretary-General in last year's report addressed
internal United Nations system mechanisms, there has
been a general sense that the PBC is the most suitable
platform to generate support for Member States for a
shared and coherent United Nations peacebuilding
agenda. The PBC therefore has regularly engaged with
and been able to contribute ideas and perspectives to
the two reports of the Secretary-General before the
Council today: S/2010/386, a progress report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
and S/2010/466, on women's participation in
peacebuilding.

Last week the Organizational Committee of the
PBC convened a meeting to consider those two reports.
We had received a comprehensive briefing by Assistant
Secretary-General Judy Cheng-Hopkins. The meeting
was also briefed by J can-Marie Guehenno, Chair of the
Secretary-General's Senior Advisory Group for the
Review of International Civilian Capacities, another
important process emerging from the 2009 report on
peacebuilding.

Allow me to share with the Council today a few
points that have emerged from the PBC discussions last
week. First, on the matter of capacity development, we
stressed the importance of strengthening national
ownership and national capacities, in order to lay solid
foundations for sustainable peacebuilding. We
emphasized the linkage between national ownership
and national capacity development as an overarching
principle for an effective peacebuilding strategy.
Secondly, with regard to roles and responsibilities, we
noted the progress made in clarifying roles and
responsibilities in the areas of mine action and
meditation. We also underlined the need to make more
considerable progress in bringing clarity to the roles
played by different actors in the United Nations
system, in such key areas as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform and rule of law. We shall anticipate the outcome
of the ongoing reviews of roles and responsibilities in
these areas. As we all know, a more coherent and
effective peacebuilding response will benefit from
clarity and consequently from establishing solid
accountability frameworks for actions in these priority
peacebuilding areas.

Thirdly, where the relationship between the
United Nations and the World Bank is concerned, the
PBC devoted a significant portion of its activities in
2010 to exploring means to strengthen the partnership
with the World Bank. We therefore welcome the
ongoing initiatives to strengthen the relationship with
between the United Nations and the World Bank at the
headquarters level and underline the need for more
concrete progress in the field. There are encouraging
signs of more dynamic country-specific linkages, such
as in the case of the Central African Republic.

Fourthly, on financing, we cannot overemphasize
the need for coordinated and more predictable financial
support for peacebuilding initiatives. We therefore
reaffirm the need for flexible financing for
peacebuilding instruments. We noted in this regard the
progress made in the process for Peacebuilding Fund
projects approval through the Immediate Response
Facility and an increased envelope from this facility for
up to $10 million.

The PBC has contributed to the report on
women's participation in peacebuilding during the
drafting phase. We noted the action plan, which aimed
at a more gender-responsive peacebuilding agenda. As
members are aware, the PBC mandate recognizes the
role that women play in peacebuilding, both as victims
of conflict and as critical agents for positive change
and for rebuilding societies emerging from conflict.
The PBC will continue to work with all relevant actors
in the countries on its agenda, to ensure that its advice
is gender-responsive and that women's role and
participation in peacebuilding are appropriately
reflected. We also look forward to engaging with the
newly established UN Women, and we take this
opportunity to congratulate Mrs. Michelle Bachelet on
her assumption of the leadership of that new agency.

In conclusion, I wish to note that the progress in
developing the Secretary-General's reports related to
peacebuilding has helped to highlight a number of
opportunities and challenges facing the continuing
evolution of the United Nations peacebuilding agenda.
By generating the need for the actors to engage in and
contribute to the recommendations, we are gradually
placing emphasis on the need for better integration of
efforts. The PBC is committed to continue to champion
the cause for a more responsive, coherent and
integrated United Nations peacebuilding agenda. A
closer synergy between the Security Council and the
Commission will certainly be a crucial step on the path
towards that end.

