Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
women and peace and security and for highlighting this
priority issue. I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your successful presidency
of the Security Council this month. We join others
in thanking the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her briefing and
offer our continuing support to UN-Women in its role
in advancing this agenda. We would like to reiterate her
call for efforts to achieve gender parity in the United
Nations. We look forward to working with the Secretary-
General-designate on this critical agenda item.

In addition, we would like to thank Ms. Rita Lopidia
for sharing her expertise on the important role ofwomen
in all phases of the peace process in South Sudan.

As a member of the Group of Friends on Women
and Peace and Security, the United Arab Emirate's
would also like to endorse the Group's joint statement.

One year has passed since we marked the 15-year
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2242 (2015),
co-sponsored by nearly 70 Member States. As a
co-sponsor of the resolution and a strong advocate of
the women and peace and security agenda, the United
Arab Emirates is committed to building a strong
framework for action to achieve the full implementation
of the agenda.

In following up last year's commitments, the task at
hand is a challenging one in view of the global threats
to peace and security. Terrorism and extremism are
real threats, and violations of women's rights, as well
as sexual violence against women, are intrinsically
linked with the strategic objectives and ideologies of
extremist groups. United Nations-led investigations
have uncovered the use of sexual and gender-based
crimes by Da'esh and Boko Haram as tactics of those
terrorist and extremist groups. We have all seen the
widespread targeting of women and girls in conflict
zones, which represents a fundamental push-back
against women's rights. The scale and protracted
nature of the forced displacement crisis are growing,
with 12.4 million new cases of displacement driven by
conflict and persecution in 2015 alone. That brings the
total number of people in dire need of protection and
assistance as a consequence of forced displacement to
65.2 million, 50 per cent of whom are women and girls.

We know that the global landscape is challenging,
but the international community has made tangible
gains in the past year, in partnership with United
Nations. First, the women and peace and security
national focal point network, spearheaded by Spain,
will drive the coordination and implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda at the national
level. As a founding member of that network, the United
Arab Emirates is committed to translating the women
and peace and security agenda domestically.

Secondly, the League of Arab States and UN-
Women hosted a ministerial conference in Cairo
last month on women achieving peace and security
in the Arab Region. That conference facilitated the
implementation of the regional strategy and action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000) and adopted a number of
resolutions on financing and monitoring mechanisms
in order to enhance accountability and ensure serious
commitment to achieving the goals of the women and
peace and security agenda.

Thirdly, the Security Council now hosts the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, led
by the United Kingdom and Spain, which focuses on
country-specific situations in order to mainstream
gender considerations. But it is not enough to merely
turn the tide. As an international community, and
particularly at the United Nations, we are attempting to
shift how the system operates in order to place greater
focus on conflict prevention and sustaining peace at the
policy level. That is something that we will continue to
strive to achieve as an international player committed
to the full realization of the women and peace and
security agenda.

One of the founding principles of the United
Arab Emirates is the full, meaningful and continually
improving participation of women in every aspect
of our society. In recognition of that core belief, the
United Arab Emirates foreign policy strategy now
includes women's empowerment and protection as
priority themes. In recognition of the key role that
UN-Women plays in advancing gender equality and
women's empowerment, the United Arab Emirates and
UN-Women opened a UN-Women Liaison Office in
Abu Dhabi just last week. The Office will enhance and
strengthen collaboration to advance gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls - a core
part of any women and peace and security agenda in
the region.

As a sponsor of resolution 2242 (2015), the United
Arab Emirates recognizes the need to integrate gender
analysis into the drivers of radicalization for women,
while also considering the impacts of counter-terrorism
strategies on women's human rights and women's
organizations. This requires a strong research base,
so that our policies are data-driven and effective. The
United Arab Emirates is contributing to that research
base by supporting the UN-Women global programme
on women and peace and security in order to promote
conflict resilient societies through prevention efforts
that facilitate women's participation, leadership and the
protection of their rights. The global programme will
further gender-sensitive research and data collection to
reveal the drivers of extremist violence and the impacts
of counter-terrorism strategies on women's rights and
women's organizations.

The United Arab Emirates is also committed
to combating extremism through the Sawab Centre,
an online messaging and engagement programme,
developed in partnership with the United States, in
support of the Global Coalition against Da'esh. Sawab
uses direct online engagement to counter terrorist
propaganda rapidly and effectively, including the
messages used to recruit foreign fighters, raise funds
for illicit activities and intimidate and terrorize local
populations. In November 2015, Sawab launched a
campaign entitled "Da'esh denies her dignity" to
coincide with the International Day for the Elimination
of Violence Against Women. The campaign told the
stories of five women who escaped Da'esh through
video testimonials and visual depictions of their
treatment. Two of those women are Yazidi and describe
how they were treated as less than human, beaten, and
sold in slave markets over and over again.

Resolution 2242 (2015) makes the critical link
between the women and peace and security agenda and
humanitarian action, recognizing the impact of forced
displacement on women and girls, while emphasizing
their roles as first-line responders and the necessity
of engaging women in the design, delivery and
implementation of humanitarian responses. The United
Arab Emirates is doing its part to address the global
humanitarian crisis, in which women, children and
adolescents are often hit the first and hardest, and helped
last, and 50 per cent ofpreventable maternal, under-five,
and newborn deaths occur in humanitarian settings.

The United Arab Emirates continues to be a
steadfast advocate of the Every Woman Every Child
Everywhere platform. That platform recognizes the
disproportionate impact that humanitarian and fragile
settings have on women, children and adolescents, and
the role that women and young people play as front-line
responders. They are not only key for the survival and
well-being of children, families and communities, but
also to build resilience and facilitate the transition from
crises to development.

The women and peace and security agenda is key
to achieving sustainable peace and driving operational
effectiveness. With that in mind, I would like to make
three recommendations.

First, we must bring women's participation and
leadership to the core of peace and security efforts.
Women are transformative agents of change. By
removing obstacles and incentivizing the effective
participation of women in peace and security, we can
strengthen the sustainability and inclusiveness of our
peace and security efforts. That includes increasing
the leadership of women at senior decision-making
levels here at the United Nations. Secondly, we must
prioritize the protection of women's and girls' rights
during and after conflict. Thirdly, we must address
the humanitarian crisis with the understanding
that women are best placed to advise and lead on
humanitarian responses.

The United Arab Emirates is committed to
prioritizing gender equality and women's empowerment
in peace and security settings. We will continue
to advocate for the full, effective, and meaningful
participation of women in all aspects of leadership
and decision-making, and working towards the full
realization of the women and peace and security agenda.

