Mr. Necula (Romania): First, I would like to
present our heartfelt condolences to the people of Sri
Lanka following the attacks on Sunday, which Romania
strongly condemns. Our thoughts and prayers go to the
families of the victims.

Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
We would now like to add a few remarks in our
national capacity.

At the outset, allow us to commend the presidency
of the Security Council for its initiative to host this open
debate on women and peace and security and conflict-
related sexual violence. We salute the presence of the
two Nobel Peace Prize laureates, Ms. Nadia Murad and
Dr. Denis Mukwege, and of the human rights lawyer
and the activist who are committed to putting an end
to sexual violence and related crimes as weapons of
war. Their tireless efforts to speak and act against
abominable practices targeting women and girls who
are affected by conflicts should be an inspiration as
we collectively strive to achieve international peace
and security.

The scourge of sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict must be brought to an end. Those terrible
tactics of war take a toll not only women and girls,
but on whole communities, leaving both visible and
invisible permanent scars for many future generations.
The enslavement and trafficking of victims provide a
source of financing to terrorist cells and other culprits,
enabling the continuation of abominations, while the
stigmatized and marginalized children born of war rape
are particularly vulnerable to being recruited from a
very young age by armed groups, thereby maintaining
a circle of perpetual violence and insecurity.

As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/280)
shows, facts such as underreporting and the prevalence
of non-State actors as principal perpetrators are
considerably impacting on the success of efforts to
fight against those crimes, altogether weakening the
confidence of victims that they will ever receive the
appropriate reparations.

The United Nations community and all Member
States ought to direct their attention to identifying
and holding offenders accountable, seeking justice,
compensation and psychosocial support for victims
and, last but certainly not least, enabling survivors
to testify against such terrible gender-based violence
and harmful practices. We particularly commend the
key role played by the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in that regard. As a court of last resort whose
jurisdiction is complementary to that of States, the ICC
plays a determining part in fighting against impunity
for the most serious crimes of international concern,
including in cases of conflict-related sexual violence.

We are deeply concerned about the shrinking space
for civil society and its negative impact on the capacity
to prevent and resolve conflicts and to build and
maintain peace and security. Intimidation and reprisals
against women peace activists, humanitarians and
relief workers and women human rights defenders are
truly worrisome. Their work and support for victims of
conflict-related sexual violence is often the only type of
assistance that the afflicted persons get, and we should
contribute to enabling them to continue providing their
essential services, including by giving them greater

visibility in the public space, which is long overdue for
those women.

As a candidate country for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the term 2020-2021,
Romania pledges to focus on providing support to
the most vulnerable groups afflicted by violence and
hostilities, including to the victims of conflict-related
sexual violence, and to work together with all relevant
governmental, humanitarian and civil society partners
towards their destigmatization, reinclusion and full
participation in peacebuilding efforts.

Women's presence in peacekeeping operations
often proves to be key in building trust and developing
positive relationships and solid cooperation with the
afflicted local communities, especially in the ranks of
the most vulnerable groups, including those likely to
be subjected to sexual violence. The image of women
as protectors is often associated with reassurance and
empathy, and their ability to fill this gap in the needs of
the communities they serve is a major asset. Romania
proudly has seven female officers participating in peace
operations at the present time.

As we work towards the adoption of a national
action plan on women and peace and security, we
are devoting special attention to creating awareness
and equipping all military personnel to be deployed
in peace operations with knowledge and relevant
skills on gender-related issues, as well as to ensuring
compliance with the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians and those enshrined in the United Nations
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse.

Today, we are honoured to be presenting a series
of commitments that Romania has decided to assume
in the perspective of next year's twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) at the special high-level event
organized in the margins ofthis meeting. As always, we
are ready to do our best and deliver our most to advance
the women and peace and security cause.

