Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to start by saying how pleased I am to be able to
participate in this debate on women and peace and
security. I wish also to thank the two briefers for their
presentations and also to welcome the efforts made by the
Secretary-General within the framework of this issue.
We also reiterate our support for the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2242 (2015).

Sudanese women have always been essential
partners in preparing and participating in parliamentary
and presidential elections, including those held this
past year. Today, 30 per cent of our parliamentarians
are women. Women hold important positions in
Government. They are and have always been essential
partners within the framework of the national dialogue
launched in 2014 by the President of the Republic, the
results of which we celebrated on 10 October. Women
make up 66 per cent of the civil servants of the Sudan.
We can therefore rightly state that women in the Sudan
serve as an example, as they have enjoyed all of their
rights for almost 60 years.

As one example, Sudanese women enjoyed the
right to vote and to run for office back in 1955, well
before women in many other countries around the
world, including those of the other continents. Women
also participate in and are members of our security and
police forces. They are legal practitioners and work in
the diplomatic services. We consider their participation
in civil society to be essential. Women's associations
have contributed to expanding women's participation in
many fields, thereby strengthening the implementation
of international strategies and policies, including in the
context of relevant Security Council resolutions.

The Sudan continues to abide by its commitments
in that area. Indeed, we have adopted a strategy for
women covering close to a quarter of a century, from
2003 to 2027. We have adopted a national strategy to
combat violence against women, a national policy to
empower women, a national demographic policy, a
national plan for Sudanese women, and a national law
against human trafficking, including of women and
girls. In the framework of lessons learned, I refer to two
provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
which guarantees the rights of women in all executive,
legislative and judicial bodies and incorporates all
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), concerning
women and peace and security. The resolution calls
for the strengthening of women's participation in
peacekeeping operations and all efforts aimed at
establishing and building peace.

Strengthening women's participation in
decision-making is necessary to achieve inclusive and
sustainable development. The protection of women
also requires our attention, especially in the case of
conflict or natural disaster. Anything that impacts
women also impacts children. There can be no lasting
military solution to an armed conflict. The use of force
is always a temporary measure dictated by the need to
defend oneself, civilians or territorial integrity and to
maintain law and order, but in the end there is always a
need to achieve a negotiated solution.

The earlier that is accomplished, the better. Early
conflict settlement spares and saves a great many lives.
When such an agreement is concluded, all parties,
domestic and foreign, must refrain from undermining
it. The United Nations must adopt that principle and
tolerate no exceptions in that regard, in the context of
peacekeeping operations. We condemn all forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse carried out by United
Nations peacekeepers, and support the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy.

We also condemn the intolerance and violent
extremism that are a source of concern for the whole
world today, especially given the increase in the number
and power of extremist groups that are attacking the
principles of peace, justice, human dignity, in complete
contravention to the basic tenets of the United Nations,
as well as development efforts and human rights
principles. The United Nations must confront those
threats and take all necessary measures to protect
women and children. We are gratified to learn of the
Secretary-General's contribution in that field.

In keeping with the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, we call for the adoption of a comprehensive
approach that takes the women and peace and security
agenda into account in the resolution and settlement
of conflicts, the need for capacity-building and the
strengthening of technical assistance and cooperation
with countries, given the fact that gaps and inequalities
in development efforts are among the main causes
of conflict. We call for the lifting of constraints on
national efforts, including unilateral sanctions, and
of foreign debt and sanctions imposed on countries
affected by conflict.

