Mr. Cervenka (Czech Republic): My delegation
fully associates itself with the statement just delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on having organized this important
debate. We highly appreciate the efforts of your
country to promote the post-conflict peacebuilding.
The July 2009 ministerial debate held on your initiative
(see S/PV.6165) and today's follow-up constitute the
best proof of Uganda's commitment to peacebuilding.

Let me take this opportunity to stress that the
Czech Republic fully shares your appreciation of the
importance of the early post-conflict peacebuilding.
Experience over the past decade clearly shows that
United Nations peacekeeping operations alone are not
sufficient for breaking the vicious circle of countries
relapsing into new conflicts. Peacekeeping must be
accompanied by peacebuilding efforts from the early
stages of the deployment of United Nations
peacekeepers. The character of recent conflicts has
changed, and the United Nations has to adapt
accordingly. The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) and his July progress report (S/2010/386)
clearly demonstrate the general acknowledgment of
this fact.
The Czech Republic devotes great attention to the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), a body
within the United Nations system which helps
countries with their peacebuilding efforts. This year's
PBC review process gave us an opportunity to take
stock of achieved results and to formulate
recommendations for the improvement of the
Commission's future work.

We welcome the fact that during the four years of
its existence the Peacebuilding Commission has
established very fruitful working relations with the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. But there is still room for improvement.
Looking at the PBC working methods laid down in the
founding resolutions, we can see that the Commission
has not yet started to formulate the exit criteria for
disengagements.

Also, cooperation with the Security Council
could be further developed. According to its mandate,
the PBC should advise the Security Council not only
on the countries on its agenda, but also on those in the
process of becoming a subject of a future peacekeeping
operation, as well as those finding themselves in the
phase of an operation withdrawal.

In that vein, we welcome the decision to include
Liberia in the PBC's agenda. For the first time, a
country where a robust peacekeeping operation is still
deployed has been placed on the agenda. That will
create new challenges for the PBC and new experience
will be gained.

Everything is seen as a priority in a country that
is emerging from a conflict. Helping such a country in
its vast peacebuilding efforts requires the availability
of a broad range of experts from different fields,
covering areas from security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the
restoration of core Government functions and the
building of national administration, education and
health to the revitalization of the economy. In those
circumstances, it is impossible to provide the required
expertise without civilian capacity. We must therefore
improve the process of identifying, deploying and
employing civilian experts. Close cooperation with
non-governmental organizations is indispensable.

In welcoming the second report of the Secretary-
General before us today, that is, women's participation
in peacebuilding, my delegation would like to
underline the attention given to the role of women in
peacebuilding. Women represent more than half of the
active population and bear an important part of the
peacebuilding activities. Without the active
participation of women, it would not be possible to
succeed in peacebuilding efforts, as many delegations
have outlined. We therefore support the seven-point
action plan contained in the Secretary-General's report.

In closing, I would like to stress the importance
of ensuring that all actors involved in peacekeeping,
including all parts of the United Nations system,
financial institutions, regional and subregional
organizations and donors, forge close cooperation. We
are convinced that the United Nations should play a
leading role in that process.

