Mr. Serrano: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having invited the European Union
(EU) to this important debate. The candidate countries
Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia; as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia align themselves with this declaration.

Despite 10 years of efforts, progress in protecting
women in conflict situations and in promoting their
participation in peace processes, conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and reconstruction has fallen short both
of the commitments that the international community
has made and of the needs on the ground. Violence, in
particular sexual and gender-based violence, against
women and girls in conflicts continues to devastate the
lives of many and perpetrators too often enjoy
impunity, as events in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo remind us.

The European Union is strongly committed to the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
follow-up resolutions. We urge all parties to intensify
their efforts to reach the common goal of full
implementation. In 2008, the European Union adopted
a comprehensive approach to the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008),
encompassing humanitarian, development, security and
foreign policy measures.

In practical and operational terms, the European
Union has a range of programmes addressing the needs
of women and girls in conflict-affected and
post-conflict situations, such as funding medical
services for survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence. In less than two years, it funded projects with
a direct impact on women and peace and security worth
over €300 million in 67 countries.

The European Union has started using a gender
marker to track gender mainstreaming in its
development cooperation programmes and has
appointed gender advisers or gender focal points to all
its peace and security missions.

The European Union works closely with the
United Nations and civil society to boost women's
participation in peace and security. Inspired by the
United Nations example, European Union delegations
and missions organized Open Door Days to mark this
tenth anniversary and to meet with local women's
groups. Last week, the European Union and the African
Union organized a seminar in Addis Ababa, bringing EU
civil society representatives to discuss such issues with
African representatives and to make recommendations
for joint African Union-European Union actions.

The European Union is now also creating the new
European External Action Service. There is a firm
commitment to further the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and following resolutions in our
diplomatic, defence and development efforts, as well as
to strive towards gender balance.

As for renewed and measurable commitments, we
are looking, first, to develop specific standard training
elements on gender and human rights in crisis
management, to be used by European Union staff and
peace and security missions and operations, with the
aim of increasing gender capacity and female civil and
military participation in peace missions.

Secondly, by 2013, the European Union will
develop local strategies to implement resolution 1325
(2000) in its development cooperation activities in at
least 60 per cent of fragile, conflict or post-conflict
countries.

Thirdly, to further boost women's participation in
peace and security, in 2011 we will implement specific
capacity-building projects to support civil society and
women's networks in crisis-affected countries.

Fourthly, we are committed to reporting regularly
on the implementation of EU women and peace and
security commitments, using the 17 EU indicators that
were adopted in July 2010. Those EU indicators seek
to measure progress and assess gaps in implementation
of the EU's comprehensive approach. The first report is
in the process of being completed. It is a strong
commitment towards strengthened accountability. The
EU thus commits to increasing its own accountability.

The European Union is encouraged by the
Security Council decision to take forward the set of
indicators developed by the Secretary-General to track
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in situations
of armed conflict and post-conflict and other situations.
The European Union now calls for a swift
operationalization of the indicators. The newly
established UN Women will play an important role. It
has our full support. The European Union also supports
the Secretary-General's other recommendations.

In the Secretary-General's next annual report to
the Council, the EU hopes to see proposals for a single
comprehensive framework, consisting of an agreed set
of goals, targets and indicators, to guide the
implementation of the resolution in the next decade,
including defining clear roles and responsibilities
within the United Nations system.

The European Union considers that a dedicated
working group should be established to review
progress in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and to make recommendations to the Council
on how to address gaps and challenges and accelerate
progress in implementing the resolution.

The EU asks the Security Council to redouble its
efforts in the fight against impunity. Targeted and
graduated measures should be imposed against all
parties to conflict responsible for grave violations of
women's rights. Perpetrators of sexual violence,
including commanders who commission or condone
the use of sexual violence, should be held accountable.

The Council should include sexual violence as a
priority element in resolutions mandating its sanctions
committees, and these should explicitly include sexual
violence as a criterion for the designation of political
and military leaders for targeted measures. The EU also
emphasizes the importance of the rule of law in general
and the strengthening of national and international
judicial systems to promote women's legal
empowerment.

Finally, the EU is convinced that ownership and
awareness can be strongly increased by developing
national action plans or other strategic instruments.
The EU member States currently have 10 national
action plans, with two more in the pipeline.

