Ms. Bavdaz Kuret (Slovenia): I would like to
begin by sincerely thanking Spain for organizing
today's Security Council meeting. My thanks also go
to the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of
UN-Women, particularly for the global study, which is
an excellent overview of the challenges of making the
women and peace and security agenda a reality and the
achievements won.

Slovenia supports the statements to be made later
today by the observer of the European Union (EU)
and by the representative Thailand, who will speak on
behalf of the Human Security Network. Slovenia also
joined in sponsoring resolution 2242 (2015), which I am
certain will further mainstream gender in the peace and
security agenda.

The anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
presents us with a unique opportunity to reflect upon
our activities over the past 15 years and to renew our
commitments. Slovenia has been active in promoting
the women and peace and security agenda in various
forums. We are a member of the informal group of
friends of resolution 1325 (2000) within NATO and of
the EU informal task force for its implementation. In
2014, Slovenia hosted the third seminar of the Initiative
on Mediation in the Mediterranean, which addressed
the role of women in mediation. In September, the Bled
Strategic Forum discussed ending sexual violence in
conflict. Most of Slovenia's activities on the women
and peace and security agenda have been carried out
as part of the implementation of the 2010-2015 national
action plan for the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008).

The political representation of women in Slovenia
is very good - 47 per cent of the Government and
34 per cent of the Parliament. Significant improvement
was made in women's equal participation in the armed
forces. The percentage of female members of Slovene
armed forces is now approximately 15 per cent, which
ranks Slovenia among the top countries in the world.
I would like to highlight the following with regard to
Slovenia's future commitments.

We will continue to promote the women and peace
and security agenda in our activities in international
and regional organizations and to strengthen cohesion
among them. Slovenia will continue to raise this agenda
item in the Human Rights Council, in particular when
addressing country situations and within the scope of
the Universal Periodic Review mechanism. We will
promote the role of women in the international peace
and security agenda and will strengthen efforts for
their protection in conflict situations. That is also
one of the goals of our new national programme on
equal opportunities for women and men for the period
2015-2020.

Slovenia will continue to pay particular attention
to training and education on women and peace and
security in the military, police and judiciary. In 2016,
we plan to develop a strategy on gender equality in
international development cooperation, which will also
take into consideration women and peace and security
issues. We will also continue to give financial support
to relevant projects carried out by the Slovenian
non-governmental sector.

In conclusion, I concur with previous speakers
that the women and peace and security agenda must be
addressed comprehensively. I call upon all stakeholders
to harmonize their activities in the implementation of
this agenda of universal importance.

