Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you warmly, Sir, for having rescheduled
the open debate originally scheduled by the Guatemalan
presidency, and for giving us this opportunity to take
stock of progress made and the challenges remaining
in the advancement of women in the framework of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. I
would like to particularly welcome the focus in today's
debate on the important role that women's civil society
organizations play in the prevention of conflicts and
their commitment to peacebuilding.

I also thank today's speakers for their enlightening
briefings. While I fully align myself with the statement
made by observer of the European Union, I would
like to underline a few aspects that are of particular
importance to us.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/732) shows the headway we have made over the
past two years. Let me mention the progress made in
implementing the seven-point action plan on women's
participation in peacebuilding, as well as the adoption
of a strategic results framework on women and peace
and security on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

There is a self-evident interconnection. There can
be no prevention of conflict without the participation
of women, and no participation without effective
protection of the rights and the physical and moral
integrity of women. It is therefore necessary to make
progress simultaneously on all these issues. It is
also encouraging that a growing number of regional
cooperation mechanisms and national action plans have
been launched.

However, the overall result remains mixed. We
can only share the Secretary-General's disappointment
at the weak representation of women in peace
talks, at the structural problems that limit women's
participation in political life, and at the resurgence
of violence against women. The figures concerning
women's participation in politics in the broadest
sense - of which conflict prevention and peacebuilding
are but an extension - speak for themselves. Among
the delegations involved in 14 peace processes in
2011, only four benefited from women's participation.
During the same year, out of the nine peace accords that
were signed, only two contained specific provisions on
women and peace and security. The situation regarding
political representation is no more encouraging.
Women still represent only 20 per cent of members of
Parliament, and only slightly more at the ministerial
level. This is hardly sufficient.

The regions most affected by conflicts are, alas,
often also the regions in which the social and political
situation of women is the least advantageous. For this
reason, we must lay stress not only on women's training
for political participation, but also on improving
material conditions so that women can participate
in elections, as well as on protecting women during
electoral processes, including before and after the
elections.

In this context, since 2010 Luxembourg has
supported an important programme set up by the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Through this programme, which is being implemented
in close consultation with national authorities and
women's civil society organizations, we are proud
of having contributed to the significant increase
of women's political representation in Timor-Leste
following the parliamentary elections of July 2012. The
mobilization of women has also been strengthened in
Haiti through the organization of some 350 training
workshops at the community level. In November 2011,
we supported a regional workshop in Goma, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which allowed
for an exchange of experiences among women's
organizations in the Great Lakes region in the field of
peace, security and the prevention of elections-related
violence. This year, we are supporting the participation
of women in political life in the Republic of South
Sudan through training and other capacity-building
measures, which also benefit women's civil society
organizations. Before the end of the year, again with the
support of Luxembourg, a regional workshop wili be
held in Liberia in order to consolidate the achievements
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia, to promote
the role of women in peacebuilding in West Africa,
and to strengthen women's regional peace and security
networks.

"The future of men is women", wrote Louis Aragon.
I leave the poet's assertion to listeners' interpretation.
In any case, the conviction that women have a specific
role to play in the future of a world liberated from
the scourge of war is gaining ground. It is up to us to
seize this chance by continuing to support women and
women's civil society organizations in their actions for
peace. The Security Council can count on Luxembourg
to contribute to this collective endeavour.

