Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure to address you today on behalf of the Arab
Group and to express the Group's appreciation for the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on the
fifth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security.

I thank those who preceded me for reflecting on
the United Nations system-wide efforts to strengthen
commitment, accountability and transparency and to
evaluate, monitor and report the progress realized.

The Arab countries work in close cooperation
with the United Nations system to strengthen the
means of protecting women during times of conflict,
and to consolidate the role of women and their
participation in post-conflict stages. That is in concert
with our belief in the major role that women play,
especially under the exceptional circumstances
represented by foreign occupation with the ensuing
deterioration of the humanitarian and economic
situation and negative effects on economic and social
development.

However, an evaluation of the international
situation, five years after resolution 1325 (2000) shows
that we have not realized many of the objectives we
had hoped for. Palestinian women are still suffering
under the pressures of occupation, aggravated by the
construction of settlements and the separation wall.
They are subjected to the worst and harshest treatment
at crossings and checkpoints. As a result of the deaths
of many of the husbands and sons of Palestinian
women, they have assumed more demanding family
obligations beyond their capacity.

Consequently, the Arab Group calls upon the
Security Council to take into consideration the
situation of Palestinian women under foreign
occupation, in addition to that of Syrian and Lebanese
women in other occupied Arab territories. The Council
must work towards the withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all Arab territories occupied since 1967, within
the context of a comprehensive and just peace
agreement, based on the implementation of United
Nations resolutions, international legitimacy and the
principle of land for peace.

It is difficult to speak of women without referring
to a number of the initiatives taken by the Arab
countries to enhance the status of women, not only in
times of conflict but also in peacebuilding. The first is
the establishment of the Arab Women's Organization,
which has become an effective Arab institution to
safeguard and defend the rights of Arab women,
leading towards the realization of the objectives of
broader freedom and participation and overall
advancement. The organization also seeks coordination
and cooperation among Arab countries in enhancing
the position of Arab women, as they are the
cornerstone for the solidarity of Arab societies. The
organization seeks to coordinate the Arab positions in
international forums that deal with women's issues,
regionally and internationally.

The second initiative is the first international
movement for women, security and peace, which began
in Egypt at a conference hosted in 2002 at Sharm el-
Sheikh, a conference attended by governmental and
non-governmental representatives and regional and
international organizations and civil society and the
United Nations. The movement was registered as a
non-profit organization in Geneva in 2003 and has
acquired legitimacy as the first international movement
that seeks to coordinate responses to calls for putting
an end to violence against women in times of conflict
and other times, and to enhance the role of women in
peacemaking.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
should make the best possible use of all the main
organs of the United Nations, each with its original
mandate, and without prejudice to the role of the
General Assembly regarding humanitarian, economic,
social and human rights conditions, including issues
relating to women. The Arab Group would like to state
that international humanitarian activities should be
carried out in accordance with the principles of the
United Nations Charter and international humanitarian
law, especially with regard to the agreements relative
to women - notably the 1949 Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, and its two additional
protocols, and the provisions of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW), the Beijing Conference and its Plan
of Action and the twenty-third special session of the
United Nations General Assembly, entitled "Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century".

