Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
Rwanda for having organized this extremely important
Security Council debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his report on sexual violence in conflict
(S/2013/l49). And I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
for her very timely and informative statement. Belgium
fully supports the Special Representative's mandate
and the six points of her agenda of priorities.

My country has always been a strong advocate
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and will, of course, remain so. In his report,
the Secretary-General clearly highlights how sexual
violence persists in many societies as a common practice
that is often invisible and too rarely prosecuted.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union. I will therefore
limit my remarks to a few comments on the report of
the Secretary-General.

First, my delegation stresses the need to ensure that
the countries concerned themselves take ownership of
and leadthe fight againstsexualviolence.National courts
must, in our view, remain the main place where people
are charged with sexual-violence crimes. We should
of course support those courts in pursuing the fight
against impunity. Concerning crimes against humanity,
war crimes and genocide, international criminaljustice
mechanisms are an important complement to national
efforts. In that context, we believe it is appropriate to
apply the definition of sexual violence in the broadest
sense laid out in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

Secondly, my delegation is convinced that we must
focus on prevention in the fight against all forms of
sexual violence. That is one of the key conclusions of
the most recent session of the Commission on the Status
of Women, the main theme of which was the struggle
against all forms of violence against women and girls.

Thirdly, I would like to thank the United Nations
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict for its determined and courageous
work. Belgium supports its efforts to strengthen the
capacity of national actors.

Fourthly, the situations in the countries mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General are particularly
worrying. I would highlight the seriousness of the
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali and the Syrian Arab Republic, among others.
In the case of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
sexual violence against women is used systematically
as a weapon of war. Belgium attaches absolute priority
to the fight against violence against women, both
by supporting those who are doing their utmost to
help victims and survivors, but also by ramping up
diplomatic efforts to find a lasting solution to the crisis.

We welcome the information provided this morning
by Ms. Bangura on the agreement reached with the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
strengthen efforts to combat sexual violence in conflict
in that country, and our hope is that the agreement will
be speedily implemented.

Fifthly, my delegation particularly supports
certain recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General. On the one hand, it is necessary to
increase pressure on the perpetrators of sexual violence
related to conflict by adopting targeted measures
against them via the various Sanctions Committees. On
the other hand, we must make every effort to ensure
that victims and survivors have access to all of the
necessary multisectoral services and that compensation
systems are set up and all means sought to effectively
fight against sexual violence in conflict.

Lastly, we are strongly in favour of the
mainstreaming of the fight against sexual violence in
the various areas of action of the United Nations. By
way of example, we welcome the fact that the text of the
Arms Trade Treaty that was recently adopted includes
clear references to the need to take into account the
risks of violence against women and girls.

