Mr. Bessho (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
join others in thanking today's briefers, Ms. Mlambo-
Ngcuka and Ms. Rita Lopidia, for their valuable insights
on this important topic.

Allow me to begin with a quotation from Ms. Alaa
Murabit, a Libyan female activist:

"I am an arms dealer in Libya, but my weapons
reduce violence and last longer than a bullet."

Needless to say, the arms that Ms. Murabit promotes
are not real weapons, but rather take the form of
women's participation in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. I believe her words well illustrate why the
Security Council has held annual debates on the issue
of women and peace and security for more than 15
years. The issue of women's participation has real and
tangible effects on the promotion of international peace
and security.

We continue to witness a large number of conflicts
around the world. According to the World Bank, 90 per
cent of conflicts from 2000 to 2009 were relapses.
It is against such a backdrop that securing women's
participation in peace processes is vital for the success
and sustainability of those processes. For example, in
2014 a peace agreement was reached in Mindanao, the
Philippines, after 17 years of conflict, and another was
recently reached in Colombia after half a century of
civil war. It is noteworthy that in both of those recent
cases one third of the negotiators at the table were
women. Just like the case of Ms. Murabit in Libya,
those examples illustrate that many female activists are
seeking to bring peace to their countries - and they
are succeeding.

The year 2015 was a landmark year for the women
and peace and security agenda. The Security Council
adopted resolution 2242 (2015), which was the eighth
resolution on this agenda and which represents a steady
accumulation of norms on the issue. We welcome
the steady implementation of the resolution. Close to
70 countries have already announced their national
commitments to implement it. We also welcome
the establishment of the Informal Expert Group in
accordance with the resolution. We appreciate the
efforts that go beyond the resolution, such as the
establishment of national focal points in approximately
50 countries to exchange best practices on the issue.
Furthermore, the United Nations peacekeeping defence
ministerial meeting that Japan co-hosted in London
last month provided further momentum to women's
participation in peacekeeping operations.

Those developments show that norms and
commitments are already on the table. I believe
that Council members should now implement their
commitments to advance the agenda. Japan has been
steadfast in implementing its own commitments
announced last October. To that end, Japan began
monitoring the implementation of its national action
plan this year. Moreover, we have expressed readiness
to support other countries in creating their own action
plans.

First, Japan and UN-Women co-hosted an Asia-
Pacific regional symposium in Bangkok in July, with
the aim of sharing our experiences in the draftin and
implementation of our national action plans. Similarly,
Japan supported the UN-Women project for League
of Arab State countries. By funding projects of UN-
Women and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, led by Ms. Bangura, Japan aims
to protect and empower displaced and migrant women
in the Middle East and Africa. That issue requires
immediate and constant attention from the Security
Council in the world of today, as eloquently illustrated
by our briefers.

Before concluding, I would like to state that
Japan will once again host the World Assembly for
Women - WAW! for short - in Tokyo in December,
for the third consecutive year. Women and peace and
security will be one of the main topics of discussion,
and I look forward to sharing the outcomes with the
Council.

Security Council members must stand united in
promoting the agenda. Such a demonstration of unity
would carry greater political weight and convey a
stronger message to the world. During its tenure as a
member of the Council, Japan will continue to work
with other Council members and with the United
Nations as a whole to promote the important agenda.

