Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened today's meeting. We are grateful also

12-2393]
to Ms. Wallstrom, Mr. Ladsous and Ms. Megheirbi for
the useful information they presented today.

The very nature of violence during armed conflict
requires that due attention be paid to all of its
manifestations. The issue of women, peace and security
should be addressed through a comprehensive
approach, as set out in resolution 1325 (2000). Sexual
violence is a particular manifestation of Violence that
clearly requires firm condemnation and severe
punishment. The careful investigation of all incidents
and the punishment of perpetrators is a guarantee of
success in combating this egregious crime.

Of particular concern are situations where sexual
violence is widespread. However, sexual violence is far
from being a root cause of an outbreak of conflict; it is,
rather, a symptom of the impunity that prevails during
armed conflict. Some of those situations, as we know,
pose a threat to international peace and security, and it
follows that they require the intervention of the
Security Council. But attempts to artificially impose on
the Security Council the duty to address the issue of
sexual violence in all of its aspects will lead not only to
imbalances in system-wide coherence but to an erosion
of the legitimacy and importance of Council decisions
on grave, complex and urgent issues.

Let us not forget that the issue of countering
sexual violence is, in the framework of existing
mandates, taken up not only by the Council but also by
other United Nations bodies, in particular the General
Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the
Commission on the Status of Women.

We would like to recall once again that sexual
violence is but one of the crimes committed in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. We are convinced
that focusing our efforts on combating sexual violence
means that we must also pay due attention to other
crimes committed in time of conflict. Civilians
continue to be the victims of crimes such as
premeditated attacks, including terrorist attacks, as
well as the indiscriminate or disproportionate use of
force. In our View, the Council must evaluate such
cases in an impartial and principled manner and ensure
that the perpetrators do not go unpunished.

We have carefully studied the report (S/2012/33)
of the Secretary-General. We note that the document is
rich in factual data, which reflects the credible and
comprehensive work being done to combat sexual
violence in armed conflict. Much of what has been

12-2393]

done is welcome. We can see clearly that progress has
been made as a result of the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. However, the
reliability of some of the accounts contained in the
report is questionable. We believe that taking an
unbiased approach to this delicate issue on the basis of
objective and reliable information is the key to
promoting confidence in the activities undertaken in
this respect.

We disagree with the broad manner in which the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict has interpreted her
mandate. We would draw attention in particular to the
fact that the issue under consideration today is conflict-
related sexual violence. Unilateral changes in the scope
of an issue dealt with by a special United Nations
mechanism established as a result of intergovernmental
processes and enshrined in Security Council
resolutions are inadmissible and could have an adverse
impact on our ability to resolve the issue of sexual
violence.

Accordingly, we call on the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, in carrying
out her activities, to strictly comply with her mandate,
according priority to those situations on the agenda of
the Security Council, where sexual violence is one of
the basic issues in the framework of the protection of
civilians. With respect to the need to comply with the
mandate of the Team of Experts, established by
resolution 1888 (2009), we see similar requirements.
The Team provides assistance to host countries on
strengthening the rule of law in situations of particular
concern. In that vein, we are puzzled by the fact that
the Secretary-General's report contains an arbitrary
interpretation of the mandate that sets out the basic
task of the Team of Experts as monitoring situations of
sexual violence in conflict worldwide, as well as
developing country dossiers on the basis of information
received. I wish to underscore that what I have just
said in no way detracts from the success and efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Team of Experts in the framework of their
mandates.

We are not convinced of the advisability of
establishing a special mechanism to monitor respect by
parties to a conflict for their responsibilities to combat
sexual violence. It would seem that strategic leadership
should be harmonized and that the effectiveness of
existing systems and mechanisms should be enhanced
by improving coordination among them. Indeed, that
would be in line with founding Council resolutions and
is at the core of the activities of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

We continue to believe that the Security Council
must address those issues that fall within its purview.
The issue of the sexual violence should be considered
by the Council exclusively under the agenda item
"Women and peace and security" and insofar as it is
linked to the maintenance of peace and security.

In conclusion, we express the hope that the
observations and proposals put forward by Council
members today will serve to further improve the
activities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and other United Nations structures
and bodies concerned with combating sexual violence
in armed conflict within the framework of their
mandates.

