Mr. Meszaros: Empowering women is not only the
right thing to do, but we know that it also leads to more
peaceful, just and inclusive societies. It is essential
for conflict prevention and it makes peace more
sustainable. That is why NATO supports empowering
women within our own organization, the armed forces,
civilian structures and societies of allies and partners.
NATO's current action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions have
been endorsed not only by the 29 NATO allies, but by
a total of 55 nations in all, bringing together the largest
political coalition to implement the women and peace
and security agenda. NATO aims to maintain that
momentum and level of support in 2018, with revised
versions of both our policy for implementing resolution
1325 (2000) and our action plan. Much has already been
achieved. NATO's military commands and missions
have established a network of gender advisers, and
the implementation of the action plan is supported at
headquarters level by a network of gender focal points.
Military guidelines on preventing and responding
to conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence
are being implemented by our strategic commands,
and NATO will review progress in 2018 in concert
with other international organizations, including the
United Nations.

NATO recently updated and approved a strategic
command-level directive on gender that includes
standards of behaviour and a code of conduct to be
upheld by our personnel and NATO-led forces. We are
funding research on the role of gender in countering
violent extremism, and we have initiated a structured
dialogue with civil society through the civil society
advisory panel, which held its second meeting in early
October in order to contribute to the upcoming revision
of our policy for implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
and action plan.

Nevertheless, much remains to be done. On the key
question of participation, we have seen only a small
increase in female representation in the armed forces
of member States - an average of 10.9 per cent in
2016, compared to 10.8 per cent in 2015. The average
percentage of women in NATO operations for NATO
allies was 6.8 per cent in 2016, compared to 6.4 per cent
in 2015. We understand that we need to improve those
figures, and urge our member States to do their part.

On the leadership side, women hold only 21 per
cent of the NATO civilian staff leadership positions.
Over the past year we have seen the departure of two
out of three of our female four-star officers. Again, we
urge NATO member States to play their part to redress
the imbalance.

Our work on revising our policy and action plan
for 2018 will enable us to highlight the importance of
integrating gender perspectives in all our tasks and at all
levels. Gender is not only a perspective; it is a tool that
contributes and adds value to all of NATO's objectives
and core tasks, and it is fundamental to ensuring peace
and security for all.

