Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, for chairing and organizing
this open debate and I thank Under-Secretary-General
Mlambo-Ngcuka for her briefing and her stewardship of
UN-Women. I would like to extend a special thanks also
to Ms. Paleki Ayang for her briefing on the perspective
of civil society. Indeed, I thank all five rule 39 briefers
for their very useful perspectives this morning.

Today's debate provides us all with an excellent
opportunity to take stock of the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in Africa. Quite
frankly, I hope today's session will do much more than
that. This debate should also help more women gain
positions of leadership and seats at the negotiating
table where issues of peace and security are decided,
especially as women and girls face more complex and
emerging threats, including those posed by the harsh
reality of terrorism and violent extremism.

It is undeniable that some progress on the women
and peace and security agenda has been made across
Africa since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2000. We appreciate the efforts of the 18 African
countries that have developed national action plans
that seek to institutionalize the greater participation of
women throughout government and society. But there
is still much work to be done. I would like to suggest
three areas where we should redouble our efforts: first,
in helping women overcome systemic obstacles to
political participation; secondly, in addressing gender-
based violence; and, thirdly, in tranlating the women and
peace and security norms established by the Security
Council into concrete success in the real world.

When women actively participate at all levels of
political decision-making, we know that we are all
safer, that our efforts at peacebuilding are stronger
and that around the world Constitutions and peace
agreements are more inclusive, just and lasting. But
women in Africa continue to face, and to overcome,
systemic obstacles to their political participation at
all levels of decision-making. In February 2013, for
example, 11 countries in the Great Lakes region of
Africa signed a peace accord to address decades of
violence in eastern areas of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region was a landmark document to be sure. But
it was also negotiated and adopted without any women
having participated in the negotiations. The technical
committees formed to oversee the implementation and
the monitoring of the agreement also did not include
any women. In March 2013, recognizing the absence
of women in the formal process, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
convened consultations with women leaders and civil
society groups across the region, seeking to link
their community-level effort in building peace to the
regional and the national implementation committees.
In January 2014, the Great Lakes Women's Plaform for
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework was
launched by the Special Envoy, and it provides grants to
women's organizations already working to implement
peace in the region. We applaud the dedicated leadership
by the United Nations and the countries of the Great
Lakes region for recognizing that women were missing
from the table and for taking the steps necessary to
change that.

A second area where we need to re-aim our focus
is in identifying and addressing gender-based violence
in a systemic way. The long-term success of peace
processes depends upon greater respect for human
rights and improved prospects for development. Where
gender-based violence is a major feature of conflict or
has escalated in the aftermath thereof, it poses a unique
challenge to peacebuilding efforts. In other words, it
bears repeating that gender equality is a security issue,
and thus a strategic imperative for the Council's work.
More often than ever before, we are confronted with
the unspeakable: the egregious use by violent extremist
groups, such as Boko Haram and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, of gender-based violence, not to
mention kidnapping and slavery, which are strategically
employed to achieve their aims. The abduction of over
250 Chibok girls from a school in northern Nigeria by
Boko Haram militants in April 2014 and that militant
group's ongoing use of women and girls as suicide
bombers remain tragic reminders of how extremist
groups are manipulating gender to achieve their ends.

As the international community responds to
violence extremist threats, including across Africa,
we must ensure that the needs and the perspectives of
women and girls most affected by extremist violence
are integrated into our larger approach to countering
violent extremism. Our efforts to support survivors of
gender-based violence across Africa will be incomplete
unless we also commit to fighting impunity. It is for
that reason that the United States has supported mobile
courts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
has led to 1,924 trials and 1,336 convictions of gender-
based violence since 2009. United States assistance
has also supported the training of 5,505 providers
of services to survivors, strengthened 1,103 local
organizations serving gender-based violence-affected
populations and provided 20,125 gender-based violence
survivors with a holistic package oflegal services.

The third point that I would like to stress today
is that the Security Council's active engagement
remains absolutely vital in order to achieve real and
tangible gains for women yearning to be included
in peace processes, even as we recognize that we
still have much work to do. A study on assessing
women's inclusion and influence on peace processes
by the Inclusive Peace and Transition Initiative of the
Graduate Institute of International and Development
Studies in Geneva revealed that when women have been
included in peace processes, as in Burundi, Somalia,
Darfur and Kenya in recent years, their inclusion
was mainly owing to normative pressure applied by
women's groups and their international supporters.
Our words and resolutions and debates therefore
do have an effect on the ground, where it counts the
most. Let me give just one small example of where the
engagement of the international community has had a
strong impact - actually, not such a small example, but
an important example. In Sierra Leone a programme
sponsored by the United States to strengthen women's
local political participation became a strong vehicle
for empowing women during the 2014 Ebola outbreak.
The women there leveraged their convening authority
to host outreach sessions with health-care providers
and local populations on the Ebola response. The effort
ultimately yielded important recommendations for
commmunity-led Ebola responses, standards that were
adapted by the Government of Sierra Leone.

Despite the significant progress we have made in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
in Africa, again, there is still that remains to be done.
As my Secretary of State, John Kerry said, our goal is
as simple as it is profound, namely, to empower half
the world's population as equal partners in preventing
and resolving conflict and building peace in countries
threatened and affected by war, violence and insecurity.
That is also the commitment that the Council has made,

and it is a commitmen that we must all strive even
harder to fulfil.

