Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): Normally at these
meetings, it is traditional to thank the briefers for their
statements, and I do so very strongly. I particularly
want to thank Nadia Taha for her testimony before the
Council today. I believe that it is hard to overestimate
the extent of the impact when somebody who has
suffered what she has suffered has the bravery to share
her experiences with us today. It may seem strange to
us sitting in a Chamber like this, which is so formal, to
hear something brought so directly before us.

Her bravery inspires us to take the kind of action
that Ms. Taha has been calling for and the discussion that
has taken place around this table today. Specifically,
with regard to Daesh, she said that we need to get rid
of it completely. Of course, my Government agrees
with that, and I believe that everybody and every
Government represented around this table agrees. The
brutality and the inhumanity of Daesh truly disgust us.
We heard today one story - Ms. Taha's story i of
such inhumanity, and it is extraordinary for us to hear
it in such a direct manner, sitting in this Chamber, but
what is even more shocking is that hers is not the only
story. There are countless more stories of abduction,
rape, forced marriage, forced conversion and slavery.

Sadly, Daesh is not alone in its practice of human
trafficking. It is prevalent throughout the world, from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Afghanistan
and from Burma to Somalia. The International Labour
Organization estimates that 21 million people are
the victims of trafficking, forced labour and modern
slavery. Others studies put the number at 35 million.
That figure represents half the number of the population
of my country. It simply cannot continue.

I therefore welcome the leadership shown by
Ambassador Power in bringing this issue to the Council's
attention, and I think that there are three ways in which
we should be looking at tackling that scourge. First, the
international community needs to show leadership to
give that issue the priority that it deserves, which is
what is happening here today. Secondly, we need to do
more to support at-risk groups, particularly minority
groups that are vulnerable to trafficking. Thirdly, the
Council needs to do all it can to end the instability and
insecurity that allow trafficking to thrive.

Through the Sustainable Development Goals, as
the Deputy Secretary-General has just reminded us,
the international community made an unambiguous
pledge to take immediate and effective measures to
eradicate forced labour and end modern slavery and
human trafficking. We now need to turn that goal into
a reality. To do that, every member of the international
community needs to show political leadership in
making this issue a priority. That is my first point. That
will require confronting hard truths. In my country,
the United Kingdom, there are up to 13,000 people
in modern slavery. That is the United Kingdom. The
issue is not confined to groups such as Daesh or Boko
Haram, but in recognizing our own problems, we can all
show the leadership needed to take action. Earlier this
year, the United Kingdom Parliament passed a modern
slavery act. It gives our law enforcement authority
improved tools to tackle that scourge. It ensures that
perpetrators can receive a maximum sentence of life
imprisonment and, crucially, it enhances the support
and protection provided to the victims of slavery.

Legislation is only part of the answer. We also need
to look to international organizations, businesses and
civil society for leadership. The United Kingdom is
working with the European Union, the Commonwealth,
the Santa Marta Group and the United Nations to
establish a global consensus on this issue. That means
greater coordination of effort, but also requires ensuring
that those organizations are in no way connected to
the practices associated with trafficking. That means
United Nations peacekeepers strictly complying with
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse; international financial institutions completing
thorough due diligence in granting project funding
to avoid inadvertently supporting forced labour; and
corporations holding themselves accountable through
transparency in their supply chain.

With regard to my second point - support for at-risk
groups - we have heard today of the disproportionate
impact that trafficking has on certain groups, whether
women and girls or members of minority communities;
whether Christian, Muslim, Mandaean, Yazidi or any
other faith. It is therefore incumbent on all Governments
to ensure that minority groups are protected, and it is
incumbent on all Council members to assist them in
their efforts.

The United Kingdom is supporting the Government
of Iraq's efforts to protect all minorities, promote
human rights and reassert the rule of law. Through our
development assistance, we are funding activities to
protect vulnerable civilians, including through legal
assistance and support groups for women. We are also
working around the world to combat violence against
women and girls, which is so often a consequence
of trafficking. The United Kingdom is funding
organizations that offer care to survivors. We are
combating impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence
by supporting cases brought before national courts,
and we are funding programmes that focus on attitude
changes to prevent violence against women and girls.
That includes training 800 Peshmerga forces on how
to respond sensitively to victims of sexual violence in
the fight against Daesh. I hope that all other Council
members will do what they can to support those types
of efforts.

Let me close with my third point. The most effective
way for the Security Council to prevent the gross abuses
of human rights about which we have heard today is by
ensuring stability and security. That means taking back
the territory held by Daesh. It means ensuring that there
is a political solution to the Syrian crisis, and it means
using all of the Council's conflict-prevention tools to
prevent future instability. Ultimately, as Mr. Grono
has just reminded us, it is about addressing the root
causes of trafficking, supporting normative changes so
that that behaviour is no longer tolerated, governance
is inclusive and the plurality of religions, cultures and
perspectives are not just tolerated but embraced and
celebrated.

