Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, and our briefers.

Throughout my years of public service, I have
encouraged women to use the power of their voice.
I have been inspired by my mother, who went to law
school and was offered a judgeship in India but was
unable to take the bench, owing to the challenges that
women faced in these areas at the time. I am inspired
by my daughter, who is inheriting a world in which the
opportunities for women to use the power of their voices
to advance justice, prosperity, peace and security have
never been greater. Here at the United Nations, we have
combined that passion for amplifying women's voices
with the belief that human rights issues, including those
related to the rights of women and girls, are a critical
element in peace and security. When women's voices
are silenced, whether through violence or a lack of
political rights or education, entire communities suffer,
and that suffering leads to conflict.

In the Sahel region, the Security Council has
said many times that the only solution to widespread
conflict is a comprehensive approach. And that means
empowering women in both politics and the economy.
The International Peace Institute has found that when
women are involved in brokering and implementing
peace agreements, the agreements are more likely to last.
When women are involved in peacemaking, they enlarge
the scope of agreements to include social priorities such
as children and families. The United States supports
increasing women's participation in peacekeeping
activities. But understanding the connections between
women's fundamental rights and international peace
and security means understanding that empowering
women reduces the need for peacekeepers in the first
place. When women participate in all social, political
and economic activities, local and national economies
flourish. When the rights of women and children are
protected, life gets better. Health, well-being and
educational levels improve, and all of those things come
together to protect and reinforce peace and security.

The United States is strongly committed to
empowering women in developing communities from
the ground up. We work to ensure that our assistance
goes directly to the kinds of women I meet on my trips
abroad - the mothers struggling to feed their families,
educate their kids and create a future for their families
and their communities, the women pushing through
barriers in the quest for equal political representation,
and the entrepreneurs, pioneers, goal-setters and other
extraordinary women changing the face of society.

Across Africa, the United States is helping to
build the capacity of the African Union and other
regional organizations to support women's political
participation. We are honoured to be working with
Special Envoy Diop on the Continental Results
Framework for Monitoring and Reporting on the
Implementation of the Women, Peace and Security
Agenda in Africa. In the Sahel, the United States Agency
for International Development (USAID) is working to
build stronger connections between the programmes it
funds for food security, health, micro-enterprise and
community development. Ivanka Trump is working
to give more women in emerging markets access to
financing and capital. As she reminds us, women are
the world's safest borrowers, paying back microloans
at 97 per cent. In addition, women business owners
create a multiplier effect in communities. They are
more likely to hire other women and reinvest in their
families and communities. In the Niger, USAID is
engaging women in community dialogues and local
decision-making in order to prevent violent extremism
in vulnerable communities. Traumatized, uneducated
young boys are prime targets for radicalization, and
nobody understands that better than their mothers. The
thread that runs through all ofthese efforts is that when
we bring together women with power and resources,
we create deeper, more sustainable prosperity. And
that stability and prosperity protect human rights and
promote security.

I recently spent some time with a woman who
understands better than most the consequences of a
failure to protect the rights of women. Regional United
Nations Women Ambassador for Africa Jaha Dukureh
is an inspiration, because she speaks from personal
experience. When she was a week old, she became a
victim of female genital mutilation. When she was 15,
she was forced into child marriage. But she managed
to escape all of that. She beat almost impossible odds,
got an education and became an advocate for the
world's most vulnerable girls and women. Ambassador
Dukureh has found the power of her voice. She should
inspire all of us to follow her example and do more than
pay lip service to women's rights, by seeking out girls
and women and listening to their voices. Protecting
their rights actually creates opportunities that benefit
the cause of international peace and security.

