Mr. Blazey (Australia): Thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this important meeting on
women, peace and security. We join other delegations
in expressing appreciation for the valuable
presentations. This meeting is appropriate, given that
women still play a very marginal and neglected role in
conflict prevention and resolution.

As we see it, two basic challenges face the
international community as we address the issue of
women, peace and security. The first relates to the
scepticism mentioned earlier. It is the ongoing task of
making it the genuinely accepted wisdom that conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peace-building all
benefit enormously from the proper application of
gender perspectives. That is gradually being achieved
within the United Nations system, and it can be
assisted by leadership, by the further development of
focused training strategies and by the appointment of
gender specialists. The more important aspect of the
challenge, however, is how to incorporate gender
perspectives and how to enhance the role of women in
communities that are experiencing conflict or are at
risk of conflict. That is where the bulk of our future
work should lie if we want to see the widespread
benefits of applying gender perspectives to conflict
situations.

The second challenge is how to continue to
transform general principles and statements of intent
into meaningful and practical programmes, policies and
activities in the field. Work is being done in that
regard, as we have heard - particularly in newer
United Nations peacekeeping missions - but very
much more will be needed.

The forthcoming study of the Secretary-General
on women, peace and security - which Australia has
supported with a grant of $A100,000 - together with
the complementary study being undertaken by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), should provide a good basis for developing
strategies and approaches that have real impact.

We welcome the intention of the drafters of the
Secretary-General's study to provide practical and
focused recommendations. Consistent with that
practical focus, we would be cautious about
recommendations for more action by United Nations
legislative bodies on this subject. In our View, it would
be more productive to allow resolution 1325 (2000) to
be regarded as the definitive statement of the Council's
View on gender and security, rather than to risk
diminishing the Council's coin by issuing further
resolutions. The key task should be how to turn
resolution 1325 (2000) into a living document of use to
practitioners and to communities in conflict. The study
should consider recommending how that might be
achieved.

Like others, we see merit in the study's providing
concrete examples of situations where the participation
of women and the application of gender perspectives
helped provide conditions for a cessation of hostilities
and for the creation of viable, productive post-conflict
communities. In Australia's region, the Bougainville
peace process benefited from the active participation of
women's groups, which played a vital conciliatory role

in bringing warring factions together and in fostering
more harmonious community relations. In the Solomon
Islands, too, women played an important supportive
role in the quest for peace. The study's inclusion of
such examples - and, of course, of the East Timor
experience - would enhance its practical value as a
tool for positive change.

Thought also needs to be given to the question of
how success and progress are to be assessed. In this
regard, it will be necessary to carefully distinguish
means from ends. For example, appointing gender
specialists, while a worthwhile objective, is still
primarily a means, a step towards an end, and not an
end in itself. The real test is in the field: have women
been more directly involved in peace processes, in
conflict prevention and in peace building? Have their
needs been met? Have their perspectives been valued
and built into United Nations peace activities? Have
their interests been taken into account in strategies
which address the political economy of conflict? The
careful delineation of means and ends may also assist
in resolving the current difficulties over funding the
senior gender adviser position in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Australia firmly supports the
establishment of that position.

Finally, we would place high value on developing
accountability measures to track the state of, and any
progress in, bringing perpetrators of crimes against
women to book and in establishing mechanisms to
address cultures of impunity.

