Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The Senegalese
delegation welcomes the convening of this open debate
on the topic of women and peace and security, 17 years
after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which
marked the first milestone of truly taking into account
the issue of women in peace efforts. It is a topic that
the Security Council has elevated to the front ranks
of priority so as to better fulfil its primary mission of
conflict prevention and resolution, in accordance with
Charter of the United Nations.

The acuteness and multidimensional scope of
the issue are clear in the statements that we have just
heard. On that note, I would like to thank the briefers:
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General; Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women; Ms. Michaelle Jean,
Secretary General of the International Organization
of La Francophonie; and Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas, civil
society representative.

This is a good opportunity for my delegation to
reiterate that Senegal, like the other African countries
and organizations, remains firmly convinced that, for
the maintenance of international peace and security to
be effective and lasting, we cannot overlook the role
and invaluable contribution of women, who are the
main victims of all kinds of violence, including sexual
and gender-based violence. The simple, mathematical
reality should compel us to ensure that the majority of
the world's population, comprised of women, is more
included and empowered so as to stabilize the world
and bring about lasting prosperity.
From the fourthWorld Conference on Women
in Beijing to the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, there is unanimous
agreement that countries and human communities
are more peaceful and prosperous when women enjoy
the same rights and opportunities as men. Persistent
insecurity and inequality in the social, political,
economic and even environmental spheres negatively
affect women, and thus hinder gender equality and
women's empowerment. Women's specific experiences
and lives in times of conflict and in times of peace,
nor their skills, are still not sufficiently taken into
account in conflict prevention, conflict resolution,
reconciliation, reconstruction and peacebuilding.

I hope that today's debate will contribute to other
stages in the effective integration of women's rights
and gender equality in public policy and in the minds
of all individuals of every social status and every
cultural affiliation. It is in that respect that I welcome
the 2017 report of the Secretary General (S/2017/861),
whose recommendations call for greater commitment,
particularly in the five key areas - women's effective
participation in peace efforts, the protection of women's
fundamental rights during and after conflicts, planning
with accountability for results, strengthening gender
architecture, and the funding of priority programmes
based on the women and peace and security agenda.

Nevertheless, the balance sheet is still mixed,
despite the considerable progress made here and there,
as there are still significant challenges in many areas,
including participation in mediation and the deployment
of women in Blue Helmets.

Fortunately, the establishment of structures such
as the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, the Women and Peace and Security
National Focal Points Network, the Women's Peace and
Humanitarian Fund in order to bolster active regional
and national mechanisms, lends renewed hope to the
idea that the international community could achieve
gender equality in its efforts to build lasting peace in
the world.

Africa is the impetus behind resolution 1325
(2000), which was a resolution of Namibia. The
continent is prey to several conflicts, but it participates
in the implementation of this agenda through several
operational mechanisms and legal instruments
conducive to policies that could lead to the effective
contribution of women in the maintenance of peace
and security. Those include the Maputo Protocol to
the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
on the Rights of Women in Africa; the 2004 Solemn
Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa; the African
Decade for Women, initiated by the Women, Gender and
Development Directorate of the African Union; and the
appointment by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission of a Special Envoy on Women, Peace and
Security - all of which led to the creation of the African
Women Leaders Network. I take this opportunity to
reiterate the full support of the Government of Senegal
and to pay tribute to those brave women who, through
their actions, are contributing significantly to the
development of public policies, including those related
to the quest for peace.

At the subregional level, Senegal, alongside the
other member countries of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), has adopted the
Dakar Declaration on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). It has thereby committed decisively
to strengthening the role of women, especially in
mediation, the promotion of a culture of peace and
the facilitation of early warning systems. As a result,
a number of initiatives have been taken, such as the
establishment of a gender unit within the executive
secretariat of ECOWAS, the establishment of a gender
development centre, the adoption of a strategic gender
plan and the drafting of a gender policy.

At the national level, Senegal has integrated all
international, regional and subregional instruments into
its legal arsenal and internal institutional architecture,
in that ensuring the right conditions for the full
implementation of the international commitments it has
undertaken regarding the rights of women and girls. In
that spirit, the Government of Senegal has adopted and
implemented a sectoral gender strategy, including the
institutionalization of gender in Senegalese defence and
security force interventions. As a result, 113 Senegalese
women are currently deployed in peacekeeping
missions. Senegal's resolute commitment is a natural
extension of its gender policy, which has already led
to the adoption of a law on full gender parity in all
elected and partially elected posts at both the national
and local levels.

Like the Government, Senegalese civil society
organizations remain very active in advocating for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) by building
the capacities of women and girls in the field of peace
and security.
As successful and proactive as those strategies,
policies and measures of integration and empowerment
of women have been, many challenges still remain.
Therefore, we must strengthen cooperation among States
if we are to effectively implement national action plans
developed to ensure the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). In that connection, I would like to draw
attention to the specifics of the Sahelo-Saharan region,
where we see alarming trends in violent extremism and
terrorism and transnational organized crime, along
with concomitant trafficking - the primary victims of
which are women and children.

We must promote synergistic action among the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies,
including the various entities on the ground. For
example, the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security, created by Council resolution 2242
(2015), and the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Security
Council on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa would benefit from improved coordination in
order to identify and share lessons learned and best
practices in the integration of the women and peace and
security agenda into conflict prevention policies.

1 would like to conclude by endorsing the statement
of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres regarding the
participation of women in peace processes,

"[a]t this time, the setting up ofinclusive processes,
with effective participation of women,should be the
rule, no longer the exception."

What better way to help women and girls around the
world - by restoring the dignity that has been stripped
from them.

