Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank Rwanda for the
initiative of holding today's open debate. I welcome the
presence of Her Excellency Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, to preside over
today's meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Bangura for their briefings. China also listened
attentively to the statement made by the representative
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security.

Respecting and protecting women's rights is not
only a reflection of progress in human society and
civilization, it is also closely linked to global peace
and development. Women are vulnerable to becoming
victims of all sorts of violence in situations of armed
conflict. Not only is that a grave infringement upon
women's rights, but it is also a challenge to the full
resolution of conflicts and the rebuilding of society.

In recent years, States Members of the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
have cooperated closely to fight sexual Violence in
armed conflict. China welcomes that. At the same time,
in today's many conflict situations, sexual Violence
against women remains prevalent. The international
community has a long way to go in defending women's
security, rights and interests.

China condemns all violence against women in
armed conflict, including sexual violence. China
supports the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Council and urges parties in conflict
to abide by international humanitarian law and other
relevant international law to effectively protect the
safety of women and other disadvantaged groups. I
would like to emphasize three points.

First, in all countries, it is the Government that
bears the primary responsibility for women's safety
and rights. Conflict situations are all different. The
international community should support the countries
concerned in their efforts to safeguard women's rights
and interests and should provide constructive assistance
in that regard. External support should fully respect
the sovereignty of the countries concerned, focus on
enhancing their capacity-building and help them to
resolve funding and technical difficulties.

Secondly, the United Nations should play its unique
role fully and enhance cooperation and coordination
with other relevant bodies. The Security Council, as
the primary body tasked with maintaining peace and
security, should focus on conflict prevention, dispute
mediation and post-conflict peacebuilding, so as
to create political, security and legal environments
conducive to eliminating sexual violence. The General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the Human
Rights Council and UN-Women should coordinate their
efforts and cooperate closely with the Security Council
to foster synergy.

Thirdly, safeguarding women's rights and
preventing and containing sexual violence in
conflict require the full development of women. The
international community cannot just pay attention
to the phenomenon of sexual violence in conflict,
demanding increased pressure and punishment and the
establishment of monitoring mechanisms; it should also
eliminate the sources of conflict, devote major attention
to economic and social development, advance the status
of women in real terms and make the empowerment of
women a reality.

