Ms. Heyzer: First of all, it is an honour to
address the members of the Security Council. Thank
you very much, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on Council resolution 1325 (2000).

Two days ago, I returned from Rwanda. As I
address the Council today, I am reminded of the
women I met and of their achievements against the
greatest odds. They won the legal rights to their land
and to their inheritance. They adopted orphans and
children born of rape. They risked their lives in the
pursuit of justice, and they are supporting their families
by confronting HIV/AIDS. Those courageous women
are, at the same time, reconciling their past and
rebuilding their future.

Making resolution 1325 (2000) work means
making sure that the challenges facing women like
these become a regular item on the political agenda, in
thematic debates and every time a country situation is
addressed. In moving this agenda forward, the Security
Council invited the Secretary-General to carry out a
study on women, peace and security. To complement
that study, and to give women from conflict zones a
vehicle for expression, I appointed two independent
experts to carry out a global, field-based assessment of
the impact of armed conflict on women and of
women's role in peace-building. It is crucial that
women's voices be heard and that their work on the
ground be valued, recognized and supported. After all,
it is they who bear the brunt of conflicts, and decisions
should be made with them, not for them.

We hope that, together, these two reports will
bridge operational and political actions in support of
peace and security. That nexus goes to the heart of our
debate today. Humanitarian and human rights concerns
do not compromise military and political decision-
making; rather, they are intrinsic to it. That is the
human security equation.

Over the past year, the independent experts, Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf and Elisabeth Rehn, travelled to 14
conflict areas, the majority of them on the Council's
agenda. The experts' complete findings and
recommendations will be released in October to mark
the two-year anniversary of the Council's landmark
resolution. Together with the issuance of the Secretary-
General's report, a comprehensive agenda for action
will be proposed.
Today's session lays the groundwork for that
occasion. In preparation, I wish to share with the
Council eight principal findings and recommendations.

The first concerns prevention. Information from
and about women in conflict situations has not
informed preventive action. We all know of the forced
exclusion of Afghan women from public spaces and of
the risks they took to provide schooling and medical
care, and how that came to symbolize the crisis in that
country. But indicators of that kind are not monitored
or even systematically collected. This is as much a
problem of expertise as one of organizational
shortcomings. The experts will recommend ways for
such information to be collected, analyzed and made
available in a way that is politically meaningful.

The second concerns protection. The glaring gaps
in women's protection must be addressed. The experts
were overwhelmed by the magnitude of violence
suffered by women before, during and after conflict.
They heard testimony of gang rapes and of wombs
punctured by guns. Impunity still prevails for these
widespread crimes against women in war.

The third concerns HIV/AIDS. Wherever a
woman lives with conflict and upheaval, the threat of
HIV/AIDS and its effects are multiplied. HIV/AIDS
feasts on that deadly alliance. These are precisely the
conditions in which peacekeepers can make a
difference in promoting awareness and in providing
support to local communities.

The fourth concerns peace processes. Formal
negotiations that exclude half the population from the
political process have little hope of popular support or
of sustainability. The whole peace process suffers when
women are absent. Quotas have brought women into
the political process. In the short run, quotas are the
only way to ensure the participation of women and
therefore a more democratic, representative and
sustainable peace.

The fifth concerns peace operations. The experts
found that a gender perspective - while it is growing
and improving, as we have heard - is still not
sufficiently incorporated into peace operations. Rather,
it is isolated in the form of a single staff person or of a
small unit lacking sufficient seniority and resources.
Women in a local community often still have little
contact with missions nor do they believe that their
needs are taken into account. The experts recommend
that gender expertise inform all aspects of mission
planning and operation. That must begin with the very
concept of operation. They also recommend that peace
operations leverage their support for women by
drawing heavily on the strength of operational bodies,
such as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the United
Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations
Population Fund.

The sixth concerns codes of conduct. The experts
were alarmed at the reports of violations committed by
peacekeepers and by United Nations and other
humanitarian personnel. They support the Secretary-
General's call for zero tolerance for those who commit
such crimes, and they recommend stronger
investigative and disciplinary mechanisms.

The seventh concerns regional organizations.
Such organizations play an important role in protecting
women and in supporting their participation in peace-
building. The experts welcome the priority being given
to women in the framework of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations. They look
to women's peace organizations at the regional level to
contribute to such efforts. Many of these peace
organizations and networks have been supported by
UNIFEM.

The eighth concerns disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR). The beneficiaries of DDR
programmes must not be limited to male combatants.
Female combatants and the wives, widows and other
dependents of ex-fighters must be included explicitly.
Without gender-focused DDR, women and girls may be
left with little choice but to exchange sexual favours
for food, shelter, safe passage and other needs.

I would like to conclude with a message entrusted
to me by the women I met in Rwanda. Many of them
have testified against war criminals who still wield
power and influence. They have endured the pain of
telling, retelling and reliving their stories, often
without privacy or security. More than 60 per cent of
these women have HIV/AIDS. Women seeking justice
need protection and look to the standards set by the
International Criminal Court. They ask for witness
protection, for counselling and for security. They ask
for legal support. They ask for a separate chamber and
for female judges to hear cases of women survivors of
sexual violence. And they ask for sanctions against
Tribunal staff who do not respect the rights of
witnesses. The women of Rwanda know that the
Security Council can take practical steps to make a
difference. These women have survived genocide, and
now they face continued intimidation and physical
threats. For them, it is a matter of life and death.
Immediate action is now needed.

There cannot be justice without accountability.
With few exceptions, those responsible for crimes
against women have not been punished and women
have not been granted redress. Accountability means
being answerable to women for crimes committed
against them; it means punishing those responsible and
ensuring redress for victims. But accountability alone
will not ensure lasting peace. Gender equality and
inclusion are fundamental values on which peace-
building must be based. Women's leadership in
creating and sustaining peace at the community level
has proved essential for nation-building. We, the
international community, must support the women and
girls who are rebuilding their lives and who have
committed their lives to peace and security, for which
they have waited too long.

I want to leave the Council with the words of
Agnes, a 13-year-old girl who had been kidnapped and
who was speaking at the global conference on ending
violence against women, coordinated by UNIFEM,
linking five sites around the world. She said, "I want to
go to school. I want to rebuild my life. How can you
help me?"

