Mr. Onyeama (Nigeria): I would like, at the outset,
to express my sincere condolences and total shock at
the dastardly assassination of the Russian Ambassador
in Turkey. I think this highlights again what we all have
to do at the international level to really tackle these
terrorist crimes.

The Nigerian delegation thanks you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate and for the well-
researched concept note (S/2016/1031, annex) provided
to guide our discussion. We also would like to thank
our briefers for sharing their perspectives on this
important subject.

Conflict situations expose civilians, especially
women and girls, to grave dangers, such as human
trafficking, sexual violence and slavery. Terrorist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
and Boko Haram, operating with complete disregard
for international law and international humanitarian
law, have introduced a new dimension to trafficking in
persons and the sexual exploitation of women and girls.

Their outrageous acts of depravity have shocked
the world and drawn unprecedented attention to the
plight of women and girls in conflict situations. The
war crimes and crimes against humanity that they
commit must not go unpunished. We are pleased to
state that Boko Haram has been militarily defeated and
while some success has been achieved in liberating a
good number of the women and girls they held hostage,
we shall not relent until all of their hostages are freed
and reunited with their loved ones. We acknowledge
the important role our neighbours - Benin, Cameroon,
Chad and the Niger - are playing in the fight against
Boko Haram.

The concept note raises very significant issues and
I am pleased to share our perspectives on some ofthem.
With regard to how the Security Council can better
integrate the issue of human trafficking in conflict
situations in its work, we in Nigeria believe that this
could be achieved through enhanced engagement of the
Council with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the International Organization for Migration, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and other relevant actors.

With regard to how the United Nations can work
closely together to fight human trafficking in conflict
situations and in the context of terrorism while
delivering its respective mandates, our view is that
this could be facilitated by improved coordination. As
different agencies have different capacities in terms of
expertise, a coordinated approach would enhance the
overall effectiveness of the United Nations in the fight
against human trafficking and terrorism.

Concerning how Member States can better
implement applicable legal obligations to combat human
trafficking, we see aneed for greater commitment
to the implementation of relevant international
instruments. The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children is a case in point. It not only provides the
first agreed international definition of trafficking in
persons, but also establishes a framework of obligations
and standards for Member States to elaborate national
responses to fight human trafficking. Applying those
international instruments and relevant domestic laws is
crucial to ensuring accountability for those who engage
in human trafficking in conflict situations.

If humanitarian action is to effectively support
the victims of human trafficking and sexual violence,
we see a need for humanitarian agencies to engage
the services of relevant experts, while paying special
attention to the gender dimension of the problem.

The fight against human trafficking in conflict
situations is beyond the capacity of any one State. It
requires concerted action at the global and national
levels, complemented by the strong leadership of
the Security Council. We seize this opportunity to
reaffirm our commitment to continuing to work with
all stakeholders at the multilateral and bilateral levels
in our common fight against human trafficking.

