Mr. Homayounpour: As we have heard many
times today, the International Labour Organization
(ILO) estimates that 20.9 million people are victims of
forced labour. This represents about 3 in every 1,000
of today's world population. Forced sexual exploitation
accounts for 22 per cent of all victims, whereas forced
labour exploitation makes up 68 per cent of the total.
This is a huge business. In fact in 2014 estimates
indicated that it generates annual profits of$150 billion.
Two-thirds of the estimated total, or $99 billion, came
from commercial sexual exploitation, while another
$51 billion resulted from forced economic exploitation,
including domestic work, agriculture and other
economic activities.

In June 2014, the International Labour Organization
adopted a legally binding Protocol to the Forced
Labour Convention of 1930 (No. 29), designed to tackle
modern forms of forced labour and strengthen global
efforts for their elimination. The Protocol, supported
by a recommendation, was adopted by Governments,
employers and worker delegates to the International
Labour Conference. The Protocol strengthens the
international legal framework by creating new
obligations to prevent forced labour, to protect victims
and to provide access to remedy, such as compensation
for material and physical harm. It requires Governments
to take measures to better protect workers, in particular
migrant labourers, from fraudulent and abusive
recruitment practices, and emphasizes the role of
employers and workers in the fight against forced
labour. The Protocol is now open for ratification, and I
am happy to report 13 ratifications thus far, including
that of the United Kingdom.

It is very clear that everyone has a role to play in
fighting modern slavery and that unless we all come
together and unite against it, we are going to face an
uphill battle. That is why the ILO, with many partners,
has facilitated the creation ofAlliance 8.7. A partnership
ofpartnerships, as it is called, Alliance 8.7 is a coalition
committed to accelerating and intensifying actions to
tackle the problems of forced labour, modern slavery,
human trafficking and child labour, thereby contributing
to the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal
8.7. I invite all to join the Alliance and help improve
coordination and joint action, which, as we have heard
over and over again today, remain real challenges in
this area of work.

The ILO is also creating a global business network
against forced labour and human trafficking to work
with employers and the private sector in ensuring that
slavery does not infiltrate supply chains. We at the ILO
look forward to continuing and expanding our work
together in combatting such violations of human rights.

The meeting rose at 5.10 pm.
