Ms. Delgado (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): At the outset,
we wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Mariano Rajoy
Brey, Prime Minister of Spain, for presiding over this
open debate, which demonstrates the commitment
of Security Council member States to the high-level
review of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). We also thank the Secretary-General for his
leadership on the subject under consideration and for
his comprehensive briefing.

We welcome and thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, for her
long-standing commitment to the defence and protection
of women's rights and for introducing the 2015 report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716) on women and
peace and security. We furthermore welcome Ms. Yanar
Mohammed, President of the Organization for Women's
Freedom in Iraq; Ms. Julienne Lusenge, Director of
Fonds pour les Femmes Congolaises and President of
the Executive Board of Solidarite feminine pour la paix
et le developpement integral; and Ms. Alaa Murabit of
the Voice of Libyan Women. We thank them for their
contributions and for sharing the experiences of civil
society on this issue.

The year 2015 is crucial for women's rights, the
efforts of the United Nations towards gender equality
and strengthening the women and peace and security
agenda. We recognize the importance of this year's
important dates for the United Nations and for the
improvement of the gender issues on its agenda,
namely, the seventieth anniversary of the Organization;
the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security; the twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action; and the inclusion of gender equality in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1).

We express our concern with the growing number
and the nature of armed conflicts, the new and emerging
threats to peace and security, the increase in violent
extremism and terrorism and the exponential growth of
civilian victims, with women and children as the main
victims. According to the latest report of the Secretary-
General on women and peace and security, over the past
decade the number of people in need of international
humanitarian assistance has tripled, with 50 per cent of
them affected by armed conflicts.

We recognize that prevention is the best channel
to address potential conflict situations. We believe that
women play a crucial role in conflict prevention and
resolution and in peacebuilding.

Over the years, the Security Council has proved
its invaluable commitment to furthering the women
and peace and security agenda by adopting several
resolutions, including in the area of leadership in
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding. However, obstacles and Challenges
still persist that prevent the full implementation of
this agenda when it comes to the implementation
of the four pillars of resolution 1325 (2000), namely,
prevention, protection, participation and peacebuilding
and recovery.

In Angola, women's participation was a decisive
factor in efforts to achieve peace. The post-conflict
experience was confirmed in their direct involvement
in the peacebuilding efforts. It also showed that they
were instrumental in providing psychological support
to the victims of the armed conflict as counsellors of
peace for national reconciliation and social harmony.

In that regard, the Government established
counselling centres to raise awareness of women's civil,
political, economic and social rights as a tool for the
participation of families in the country's development,
in accordance with the Constitution of Angola. Through
partnerships with civil society organizations, efforts
have been deployed in order to solidify their social
participation in the country's political and economic
life.

The non-governmental organization Peace Roots
was born with the objective ofbringing together women
from all political parties represented in Parliament
to participate in the efforts to consolidate peace and
democracy. Also, an association called Pro-Change
Country was established to raise awareness among
men of the need to eradicate all forms of gender-based
violence.

Owing to the experience accumulated in conflict
prevention and resolution processes, Angola has been
playing a role in the preservation ofpeace and democracy
in Africa, especially in the Great Lakes region, as well
as in promoting the culture of peace, dialogue and
national reconciliation. We underscore the inclusion of
many women in the various levels of defence, security,
domestic order and migration services.

The country has also made significant progress in
the formulation of its national plan of action to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), to be carried out starting in
2016. This plan sets out seven strategic objectives, with
specific activities, goals and performance indicators as
follows.

First, we should increase the participation
of women and integrate gender equality into all
stages of peacebuilding processes, including at all
decision-making levels.

Secondly, we should provide training and ensure
the empowerment of all women, girls and boys, as
well as military and policy officers, in peacebuilding
processes, both with regard to gender equality and
gender-based violence as well as other relevant aspects
of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

Thirdly, we should promote and protect the human
rights of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations, their economic and social empowerment
and their participation in civil society, taking into
account the need to prevent and eliminate gender- and
conflict-based violence and promote the empowerment
of women.

Fourthly, we should deepen and broaden
understanding of the subject of women and peace and
security, including through training and awareness-
raising in all ministerial departments, civil society and
among political decision-makers.

Fifthly, we should encourage civil society's
participation in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

Sixthly, we should promote rural communities'
socioeconomic development while raising awareness of
their rights, increasing food security and contributing
to poverty eradication. And lastly, we should include a
gender perspective in the national budget with a view

to fulfilling the commitments established by resolution
1325 (2000).

Finally, we hope that the high-level review will
help to lead us to a world where women can effectively
play the role they deserve and enjoy their full rights.
We hope that a strong political will and commitment
to attaining those objectives will make a tangible
contribution to expanding the role and participation
of women in maintaining and building a more just and
peaceful world.
