The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Canada, Chile, Denmark, Egypt, Fiji, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Japan, Liechtenstein, Morocco, Namibia, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, the Republic of Korea,
South Africa and Venezuela in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dauth
(Australia), Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria),
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Heinbecker
(Canada), Mr. Valde's (Chile), Ms. Loj (Denmark),
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Naidu (Fiji),
Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr. Neil (Jamaica),
Ms. Saiga (Japan), Mr. Wenaweser
(Liechtenstein), Mr. Bennouna (Morocco),
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia), Mr. Mackay (New Zealand), Mr. Akram (Pakistan), Mr. Yuchengco
(Philippines), Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) and Ms. Pulido
Santana (Venezuela) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Ivan gimonovie, President of
the Economic and Social Council.

It is so agreed.

I invite Mr. Ivan Simonovie, President of the
Economic and Social Council, to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Carolyn
Harman, Offlcer-in-Charge of the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and the Advancement of
Women.

It is so agreed.

I invite Ms. Carolyn Hannan to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/llS4, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on women, peace and security.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and invite him to take the floor.


