Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for putting this item on the agenda. I would also like to
thank you, Sir, for your statement and to highlight the
good cooperation we have had with the African Union
on the topics that I will mention later.

Conflict-related sexual violence is, as I think
the Swedish Minister said earlier today, a security
challenge. It is also a horrible, despicable example of
a violation of basic human rights. Therefore, I am very
grateful again that you, Mr. President, to have put it on
the agenda.

I would like to commend Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Pramila Patten for her tireless
work. I am very happy, having listened to all the remarks
around the table for at least part of the discussion, that
the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/250) and her
presentation today, with just a few exceptions, have
been commended by everybody. Germany supports her
work and will continue to do so.

I would like to highlight the depressing findings
about sexual violence as "a tactic of war" and about the
change of demographics and so forth that were referred
to in the report of the Secretary-General and in the
remarks she made earlier today. Using sexual violence
as an instrument to force people into submission is as
grave as using gas for the same purpose. Let me focus
on four points.

First, we must support the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and her team of experts in carrying out her
mandate. Germany is committed to providing support.
We have worked very closely, in particular on the
issue of Iraq. I also appreciate the fact that the Iraqi
Ambassador highlighted the good cooperation between
Office of the Special Representative and Iraq. One of
the most outrageous examples of sexual violence in
recent decades, which has been discussed today, is
the widespread use of sexual violence as a strategy
to terrorize the Rohingya community. We urge the
authorities of Myanmar to work very closely with the
Special Representative to enter into structured dialogue
with the United Nations to assist survivors and ensure
accountability. When the Security Council travels to
Myanmar, I urge it to put this item on the agenda and
take up the proposal put forward by Ms. Sultana for
the Council to meet with survivors of sexual violence.
I believe that the Council would send a clear and
important message if it met with people who suffered
such crimes.

I would like to highlight other activities of the
Special Representative, such as work being conducted
in the Sudan. There is a culture of silence surrounding
sexual violence in Darfur, which is of deep concern. We
encourage the Sudanese Government to work closely
with the Council to grant access to the survivors.

Secondly, I would like to address the issue of
accountability. As the observer of the African Union
just stated, sexual violence, zero-tolerance. It is
very important to ensure accountability for all grave
violations of human rights - that is key. We owe it to the
victims. It is also very important to foster reconciliation
and deterrence. I would like to reiterate what was
highlighted earlier with regard to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where action was taken. Those
who committed such crimes must be punished. If they
have not yet been punished, for the rest of their lives
they must look over their shoulder and fear being caught
until they are apprehended. That covers current and
past crimes. A representative today also mentioned the
sexual violence that occurred in Europe during the wars
in the former Yugoslavia. There was no accountability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia or, in particular,
Kosovo, for the tens of thousands of victims.

The Security Council should include sexual
violence as a designation criterion for sanctions
regimes much more regularly. The Council should
also refer cases of sexual violence to the International
Criminal Court. In instances where prosecution is not
yet possible, the collection and preservation of evidence
of mass atrocities must be ensured. Germany supports
the crucial work of the Commission for International
Justice and Accountability in northern Iraq and
Syria. Germany also supports the new International,
Independent and Impartial Mechanism, which, inter
alia, should focus on crimes of sexual violence.

Thirdly, we must adopt a survivor-centred approach.
My French colleague referred to it as holistic support for
survivors. It is important to provide them with medical
and psychological care. Economic opportunities
and legal protection should also be offered to them.
Germany has received a large number of women and
children who have suffered traumatic experiences in
conflicts in Iraq and Syria. We fund projects in Iraq
to enable comprehensive assistance to be provided. I
have already mentioned our good cooperation with the
Special Representative and the Iraqi Government.

The survivor-centred approach links accountability
with psychosocial and livelihood support. Many have
mentioned that stigmatization must be fought. It is very
important that we educate girls and enhance gender-
baIance efforts. With regard to stigma, I would like to
highlight what our colleagues from Equatorial Guinea
and Poland stated earlier today. They said that we must
focus on the children conceived through rape, who
continue to need our support because of stigmatization.
Fourthly, with regard to the sharing of experiences
and best practices, the issue of empowering survivors
was on the agenda of the annual meeting of the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network, which
Germany, together with Spain and Namibia, hosted
last week in Berlin. Special Representative Patten
and others present today attended that meeting. It
served as a platform for sharing experiences and best
practices. My Spanish colleague already mentioned
it and highlighted the fact that methods of improving
accountability for crimes of sexual violence was one of
the subjects discussed. Namibia, Spain and Germany
will provide a briefing of the Focal Points Network
meeting at the end of the month here in New York.
We will extend invitations to those who are not yet
members of the Network to join us. We also support
the sharing of regional experiences through the African
Women Leaders Network. The observer of the African
Union already highlighted the important cooperation
already taking place in Africa, which is compelling
and encouraging. My colleague from Kazakhstan
mentioned that earlier today.

Once again, I thank you, Sir, for including
today's subject on the agenda. Germany will remain
committed to it. We are also committed to eliminating
and preventing conflict-related violence. The issue
of women and peace and security will remain a top
priority for us.

