Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank the German presidency
for organizing today's meeting and to express our
profound gratitude to the participants and briefers for
their information about various aspects of the fight
against sexual violence and armed conflict.
This year marks a decade since the Security
Council established the post of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. Since then the Special Representative and her
Office have done extensive work on eliminating this
form of crime. They have gained useful experience in
cooperating with Governments and other parties to
armed conflicts and developing an effective toolkit for
combating this type of crime.

The Russian Federation is committed to international
cooperation in combating sexual violence in conflict,
which is a disgusting crime of war. We firmly support
the work of Special Representative Patten and appreciate
her personal contribution to efforts to develop and
support dialogue with parties to armed conflicts in
addressing this issue, help victims and assist in their
rehabilitation, as well as to draw public attention to
the problems caused by such crimes. We thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and his report on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280), which
is enabling us to discuss the issue in a productive and
comprehensive debate. We have studied with interest
the report's very extensive recommendations on ways
to cooperate further in combating sexual violence in
conflict. Many of the proposals deserve careful and
detailed study, and we believe that today's debate is a
good opportunity for an open exchange of views on that.

We firmly believe that the key to success in
combating sexual violence in conflict is in developing
effective measures to eradicate violence against
civilians during armed conflicts. But that is just one of
the possible crimes that could be committed during an
armed conflict. In our view, putting a definitive end to
every form of violence against civilians is possible only
by resolving armed conflicts through peaceful means
and eradicating their root causes. We need concerted
work at both the national and international levels if we
are to reach that goal as quickly as possible.

In that regard, we want to emphasize once
again how important it is to ensure that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict continues to adhere to the mandate
established by resolution 1888 (2009). The central focus
of her efforts should be situations of armed conflict,
and specifically those where sexual Violence is
widespread. Every conflict situation has specifics that
must be taken into account. It is also important not to
underestimate the significance of maintaining a united
approach to understanding the scope of the Security
Council's mandate on combating sexual violence in
conflict and of refraining from attempts to broaden its
interpretation and take the Council beyond its remit of
maintaining international peace and security. A strict
distinction should be made between sexual violence as
a war crime and as an ordinary criminal offence.

We should remember that the effectiveness of the
Council's work in eliminating sexual violence in conflict
is directly dependent on overcoming differences,
promoting constructive cooperation and preventing the
issue from being politicized. We call on everyone to
unite their efforts to combat this repugnant crime in the
interests of maintaining peace and assisting victims,
and for the sake ofbuilding ajust society where there is
no place for any kind of violence at all.

