Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): It is a pleasure
to see you, Madam President, preside over this
meeting. I would like to thank you for convening it. We
welcome the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/598*), which for the first time measures the
progress of implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
against specific indicators. We also further welcome its
recommendations as an important step towards moving
the women, peace and security agenda further from
rhetoric to action.

As outlined in the concept note (S/2011/654, annex) circulated for this debate, the participation of
women in decision-making forums related to conflict
prevention and resolution, peacebuilding and post-
conflict recovery is a central goal of the women, peace
and security agenda. Research has shown that the
exclusion of women and the lack of gender expertise in
peace negotiations lead to irreversible setbacks for
women's rights. Peace accords often neglect to ensure
the engagement of women in post-conflict governance
and their access to economic opportunities, justice and
reparations.

It is unfortunate that, 11 years after the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the contribution of women
to conflict management is still severely undervalued
and underutilized. The Council must increase its efforts
to incorporate a gender perspective in relevant country-
specific resolutions, with a view to increasing women's
participation in peace negotiations and mediation and
in meeting the specific concerns of women during
post-conflict reconstruction. The Council must also,
hand in hand with the General Assembly, address the
lack of women as lead peace mediators by encouraging
the Secretary-General to appoint women to such
positions and to ensure that adequate gender expertise
is provided for all United Nations-led peace processes.
We therefore welcome the adoption of today's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/20), which will
help to further strengthen the perception of women as
stakeholders, as opposed to victims or aid recipients.

Liechtenstein honours its commitments to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), as pledged at the
commitment conference "A call to action" on
25 September 2010. We continue to support
international efforts to end impunity for the most
serious crimes, including those committed against
women during armed conflict. That commitment
includes continued financial support to the Trust Fund
for Victims established by the International Criminal
Court (ICC), which adopts a gender-based perspective
across all programming and specifically targets victims
of all forms of sexual and gender violence. Most
important, the Trust Fund provides direct assistance to
victims, and thus has an immediate impact on the
ground. The Rome Statute of the ICC has significantly
advanced international law by including sexual
violence in the definition of crimes, in particular as a
crime against humanity. The ICC therefore represents
an important mechanism in the fight against sexual
violence, which should be better integrated in the
Security Council work on the issue.

Research by the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security reveals that the Council does not
consistently apply the principles of the women, peace
and security agenda in its country-specific work. In an
attempt to make that complex agenda more accessible,
and thereby contribute to a better mainstreaming, we
have developed an iPhone application on women and
peace and security, in close partnership with
Switzerland, Peacewomen and the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, now available in
an updated version that includes monthly action points.
Those action points contain concrete recommendations
that provide guidance on how the Council can
systematically meet its obligations to women in armed
conflict.

