Ms. Bangura: I wish to join my colleague, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Vogt, in
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Council for this month. I am grateful for this
opportunity to deliver my first briefing to the Security
Council, and wish to thank you, Mr. President, and the
members ofthe Council, for inviting me to participate in
this meeting. In the interests of time, I will summarize
my statement, which has been circulated in writing.

From 5 to 13 December 2012, as Ms. Vogt noted, I
visited the Central African Republic, which is the site
of a long-forgotten conflict. This is one of the main
reasons that I chose the Central African Republic to be
the destination of my first country visit since taking
office.

I wish to express my gratitude to the Government
for welcoming me and for the frank and constructive
discussions. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank my colleague, Special Representative Margaret
Vogt, and her small but dedicated team for facilitating
the visit, and indeed laying the ground for the two
communiques that were its formal outcome.

The regrettable outbreak of conflict since my visit
only serves to accentuate the necessity to implement
some of the immediate protection commitments that are
expressed in the communiques. At this critical moment,
the international community must send a strong and
clear message that sexual violence is unacceptable and
that those who commit, command or condone such
crimes will be held to account.

Conflict-related sexual violence in the Central
African Republic is a fundamental security issue that
requires an operational security response. Widespread
sexual violence against women is being committed by
State and non-State actors alike. Such violence includes
rape by armed groups in areas under their control;
forced abductions of women, girls and boys into
armed groups; forced marriage; and some incidents of
sexual violence committed by elements of the national
security forces. Widespread violations also continue to
be committed by the Lord's Resistance Army.

The women I met in Bangui, Bria and Paoua told me
that their paramount desire was for security, the release
of women and children from armed groups, and the
disarmament of combatants so that they could pick up the
pieces of their lives. Our general lack of information on
sexual violence paralyses action - whether it is action
against the perpetrators or programmatic response
for survivors. Therefore, ensuring better monitoring,
analysis and information as a basis for evidence-based
action is a critical priority.

In the areas under the control of armed forces and
groups, the civilian population is extremely vulnerable.
It is the moral and legal responsibility of all armed
actors to prevent such violations. Therefore, all armed
forces and groups in the Central African Republic
must immediately issue clear orders prohibiting sexual
violence through their respective chains of command,
and undertake investigations to hold perpetrators to
account.

We also know that many women and children
are forcibly recruited by and directly associated with
armed groups, and that they continue to suffer sexual
violence in this context. Therefore, all armed groups
must identify and release these women and children
without further delay.

These are among the immediate protection
measures that must be taken, particularly in the context
of ongoing hostilities. These measures should not wait
for a ceasefire or peace agreement to be concluded,
because the women and children of the Central African
Republic have waited for over 20 years and cannot afford
to wait any longer. These protection measures must
be prerequisite elements of any ceasefire agreement,
and I am delighted that Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Vogt has ensured this.

In my meetings with representatives of the
politico-military groups, they acknowledged that
there were problems. They all expressed a willingness
to work with the United Nations to address sexual
violence. Even at this moment of renewed conflict and
a shifting political landscape, it is crucial that we hold
all politico-military groups, their leaders and would-be
leaders to such commitments.

I would like to recount to the Council one serious
and indicative incident that occurred during my visit. In
Bria, the Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la
paix (CPJP) had agreed to release to UNICEF custody
of a number of children associated with their group.
The day before the handover, most of the children who
had been identified were moved some 30 kilometres
from the designated handover location. In the end, the
child protection team was able to access only three
children - one boy and two girls. In spite of having
signed release documents for these three children,
the CPJP cadres on the ground refused to let the two
girls go. They insisted that the girls were the wives of
combatants. They also assaulted a member of the child
protection team. This incident goes to show that there
are special challenges to secure the release of women
and girls from armed groups.

Although the Government has taken a number of
measures, including important legislative reforms,
to address sexual violence, the capacity of national
institutions to implement them is extremely limited and
State authority and structures are absent in most areas
outside Bangui. Where a measure of political will may
exist, addressing sexual violence crimes is most often
overridden by other perceived priorities and resource
and structural constraints.

In carrying this mandate forward, I am placing
particular emphasis on fostering national ownership,
leadership and responsibility. Therefore, a primary
objective of my visit was to deepen dialogue and
cooperation with the Government. In addition and in
accordance with the will of this Council as expressed
in resolution 1960 (2010), it was essential that I engage
with the leadership of the main politico-military groups
in order to gain concrete protection commitments from
them. Such engagement with all relevant parties to the
conflict will continue to define the mode of work of my
Office.

In follow-up to my visit, it is intended that the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict will deploy to the Central
African Republic. We would like this technical follow-
up mission to take place by February or March of this
year, but the timing will of course be contingent upon
the political and security situation. The Team ofExperts
will re-engage the key stakeholders and support the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic (BINUCA) and the United
Nations country team in preparing an implementation
strategy and plan for the commitments under the joint
communiques.

The deployment of a women's protection adviser
to BINUCA to support Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Vogt in the implementation of
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and
the joint communiques is critical. I urge the Security
Council and Member States to support the deployment
of women's protection advisers.

I will encourage the United Nations system,
particularly through the United Nations Action network,
to refocus on the Central African Republic in terms
of advocacy, monitoring and reporting and services
for survivors. There is an urgent need for greater
international focus and attention on the Central African
Republic, including more sustained donor commitment
for a comprehensive and integrated response to sexual
and gender-based violence across the country.

As the briefing of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Vogt underscored, addressing
security issues, including the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of combatants and
reform of the security sector, is the prerequisite for
sustainable prevention and response to sexual violence.
The state of chronic emergency impedes all aspects of
humanitarian and development work in the country.
However, it is my belief that, with greater focus at the
highest political level and the strategic and sustained
dedication of resources, it is possible to make progress.
It will be crucial to ensure that any assistance provided
is predicated on the Government taking national
ownership and responsibility.

