Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate. It gives
me great pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over this
meeting.

I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his
intervention. Brazil is grateful for the briefing provided
by Ms. Michelle Bachelet and for the work that she
has been doing as head of UN-Women. We also thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing and
the representative of the non-governmental organization
Femmes Africa Solidarite for her intervention.

Supporting and promoting women's participation
in the maintenance of international peace and security
is an increasingly important aspect of the Security
Council's responsibility under the Charter. Since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), this body has
contributed significantly to United Nations efforts to
refine our collective understanding of the implications
of armed conflict for women and, just as important,
to support them as agents of peace. The establishment
of UN-Women and the appointment of a Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict testify
to the progress made.

There is, however, a long way to go before
women are fully and duly integrated into national and
multilateral peace efforts around the world. In various
respects, such as the number of women representatives
and mediators; the number, substance and relative
importance ofprovisions in peace agreements; and post-
conflict strategies or policies, women's participation in
peace and security processes is still insufficient.

We are therefore confronted with a real need
for the United Nations, Governments and non-State
actors to foster and support their involvement in the
field of international peace and security. Among the
several strategies that can be used to attain that goal,
one of the most important is enhancing dialogue with
women's groups in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Frequent consultations with them, for example, can be
an important vehicle to convey the specific concerns
and needs of women to all stakeholders in peace efforts,
including United Nations Special Representatives,
mediators and special envoys.

Meaningful interaction with women's groups
must also be an integral part of our peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities. Besides assisting missions
in fulfilling their mandates, in particular regarding
the protection of civilians, such groups can help
ensure a sustained commitment to gender sensitivity.
This is especially important when preparing mission
drawdowns or transitions from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, as dialogue with women can stimulate
national Governments and the United Nations family
to streamline gender issues into their policies after
missions leave the country.

Building capacity in the area of women and peace
and security is also key. Late last year, Brazil signed
a letter of intent with UN-Women, in order to deepen
our cooperation regarding the training of peacekeepers
on gender issues and the promotion of South-South
cooperation on gender issues involving peacekeeping
training centres in Latin America and Africa.

Women's economic empowerment in post-conflict
situations is also vital to making them full partners in
peace efforts and increasing their ability to contribute to
the consolidation of peace. Responding to their needs in
areas such as education, employment, land and property
rights and health services will likely reduce the chances
of relapse into conflict, for example, as women tend to
be the first ones to appreciate tangible peace dividends
in the daily lives of families and communities.

Although Brazil's reality differs greatly from that
of post-conflict countries, some of our experiences may
be useful for such societies. One interesting example
is the Bolsa Familia, a conditional cash transfer
programme that has lifted millions of Brazilians out of
poverty. Under the programme, women are the preferred
recipients of transfers, and experience has shown that
this practice increases their bargaining power within
the family structure and communities.

It is also worth mentioning that, on the margins
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, Brazil organized, in collaboration
with UN-Women, the Women Leaders' Summit on
the Future Women Want. The meeting highlighted
the need to accelerate women's full participation in
governance at all levels, including women's leadership
in all decision-making processes. It also underlined
the importance of ensuring the elimination of all
discriminatory barriers preventing women from having
equal access to, owning and managing productive
resources and assets, and from contributing to and
benefiting from the opportunities provided by the
pursuit of sustainable development. Although this
applies to all countries, we know that empowering
women may be especially important in post-conflict
situations, as it tends to enhance the chances of avoiding
a relapse into conflict.

There is compelling evidence that women, when
empowered, can have a significant positive impact on
the lives of many people in their societies, particularly
in countries emerging from conflict.

The Security Council is therefore called on to
continue to make a significant contribution to ensure
that such impact is fully felt in all pertinent situations
on its agenda.

