Mr. Faqiri (Afghanistan): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's debate, which offers
us all an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to
protecting and ensuring women's rights and their
momentous role in peace and security. I also take the
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2011/598*) and his strong words of support.
And I thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Under-Secretary-
General for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women, for her work and for her statement.

The history of war and violence has left a
disconcerting impact on my country. Violence still
takes its toll on every Afghan's life. I hope that the
anguish facing every Afghan family will one day come
to an end. Women continue to bear the bulk of the
burden of conflict in Afghanistan, while their right to
secure, healthy and prosperous lives is still in peril.
We meet today to recognize the crucial role of
women in the peaceful resolution of conflicts, the
tangible fruits of which have already been seen in
Afghanistan in the decisive presence of women at the
Consultative Peace Jirga in 2010 and in the continuing
efforts to ensure women's participation in leadership
positions within and outside of the Afghan
Government. The debate is particularly appropriate as
Afghanistan is entering the second phase of transition
to Afghan leadership and ownership and increased
responsibility for security and economic development.

With regard to development, we have begun to
implement our 10-year national action plan for the
women of Afghanistan based upon the priorities of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy. As part of
the action plan, we have established gender units in
14 of the 25 Government ministries. However, given
the 10-year timeline, accelerated efforts are necessary
to ensure the full implementation of that very
comprehensive action plan, which incorporates vital
goals that include achieving a 30 per cent rate of
representation of women in governmental positions by
the end of 2013 and their 35 per cent participation rate
among university students by the end of 2012.

We have also made strides in ensuring the rule of
law, most recently the establishment of a national
commission on the elimination of violence against
women, following the enactment of the law in that
regard in December 2010. Those steps have been vital
in enhancing Afghan women's access to legal redress
and have also sent a strong message that the
Afghanistan Government is committed to the rights of
women and to ensuring that there is no impunity for
those who violate them.

Ensuring the rights of women is only half of the
battle; we also need to see the full participation of
women, as resolution 1325 (2000) reminds us that they
have a vital role to play in peace and security. The
representation of women in governance and their
political participation has steadily increased. We have
succeeded in holding two presidential and two
parliamentary elections, in which women actively
participated as candidates, elections staff, poll monitors
and electorates.

Women comprise 25 per cent of the Parliament,
thus ranking Afghanistan thirtieth among the countries
of the world with the highest rate of women
representatives in Parliament. The Afghanistan
National Parliament has also established a resource
centre for women parliamentarians to enhance their
capacity to effectively include women's voices and
perspectives in national development and
reconstruction plans.

When reviewing these facts and figures, let us not
lose sight of the great personal risk that these women
undertake in order to participate in the governance of
their country and in their future. I wish to take this
opportunity to honour the women who continue take
risks in order to assume an active role in the future
direction, peace and security of our country.

Our international partners have assisted the
Afghan Government in our endeavours. UN-Women
has administered a multi-donor trust fund for the
elimination of violence against women that provided
grants for national organizations to combat violence
against women. I am very pleased to report that, in
collaboration with UN-Women, Afghanistan has
submitted its first country report on the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. The continued collaboration of our
Government, international partners and both Afghan
and international civil society groups will be vital to
ensure the full realization of women's rights in a strong
and stable Afghanistan.

Building a stable and secure environment that
enables women to live free of intimidation and
violence and promotes their participation and
leadership in efforts to maintain peace and security is
one of the core objectives of the Afghan Government.

We are also focusing on women political actors at
national, subnational and local levels, as well as on
capacity-building and advocacy strategies to enable
them to obtain critical roles in high-level decision-
making processes, policy and law-making positions in
key Government institutions and to assist them in
carrying out their significant political and social
responsibilities.

In conclusion, with the support of our partners
and the international community, we will continue to
work towards the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), while recognizing that our goal of
sustainable peace and security in Afghanistan will not
be achieved without the full participation of the entire
Afghan nation.

