Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, we would like to thank the Indian presidency
and the delegation of Guatemala for organizing today's
meeting. We are grateful to all who have spoken for
their assessments and useful information.

Much has changed in the 12 years since the
adoption ofresolution 1325 (2000). The major principles
enshrined in the resolution to enhance the role ofwomen
in the prevention and settlement of conflicts and in
post-conflict reconstruction, as well as the protection
of women in conflict situations, have become a type
of road map for the implementation and practice of a
comprehensive approach regarding the issues of women
and peace and security.

Unfortunately, in spite of the multiple efforts
undertaken, the number of women who are victims
of various forms of violence in armed conflict is not
declining. That is why we believe that equal attention
should be paid to all categories of violence, including
instances of killing and wounding women and children
as a result of the indiscriminate or excessive use of
force. That problem is not only theoretical; it exists
currently.

The international community is expecting results
in the investigation ofthe cases of deaths of the civilian
population, including women and children, as a result
of the NATO operations in Libya. Specific information
with regard to the facts in this case has been published
by independent media on many occasions. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has indicated, speaking also with regard to
the Council, that it is necessary to make sure that the
investigation is completed. As we know, during today's
debate we will hear a representative of NATO speak. We
would like to hope that she will take this opportunity
as adviser to inform us about the status of the results
of the investigation. We are also seriously concerned
by statistics concerning the so-called collateral damage

as a result of the use of new types of weapons, such as
drones.

Women are not only victims of armed conflicts;
they make a significant contribution to preventing and
settling them. The direct involvement of women in
conflict prevention and settlement is, in our View, an
important precondition for overcoming violence against
them. In that regard, we welcome the fact that this year
priority attention in the presidential statement was
given to issues of the role of women's organizations in
civil society in the prevention and settlement of armed
conflict and in peacebuilding (see S/PRST/2012/23).
Although a critical role in protecting women at all stages
of armed conflict belongs to national Governments,
measures undertaken both by civil society and by
United Nations system bodies support and complement
the efforts of States.

Women particularly suffer during various crisis
situations, not only during armed conflicts that are a
threat to international peace and security. We welcome
the use of background information provided by the
Council on questions of violence against women by
the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Human Rights Council and the Commission on the
Status of Women within their mandates. It is important,
however, to adhere to the existing division of labour in
the Organization and not duplicate efforts or intrude
upon one another's area's of authority. The problems
of family Violence, women's health, education and
many others are being successfully dealt with by
other United Nations bodies. The Council must, under
resolution 1325 (2000), consider women's issues solely
as they relate to the theme of maintaining peace and
security and strictly with regard to those situations that
are included on its agenda.

We have attentively studied the report of the
Secretary-General prepared for today's meeting
(S/2012/732). With regard to its contents, collected on
the basis of the first third of the assessment indicators
for implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), we
would like to underscore that the appropriateness and
relevance of individual indicators, as well as their scope
and application, still raise questions. The information
in the report given under the indicators is, for the most
part, dry statistics. There has been no serious analysis
of the information gathered. It has therefore not been
possible to understand the significance of the data, to
assess its value added or to draw specific conclusions
about the status of women from the information.

We believe that work on the indicators, which is
now at the review stage, must be more transparent
and open, that is to say, with the participation of all
United Nations Member States. With regard to using
the so-called national action plans on implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) as a tool to assess a country's

policy in improving the status of women, States in
situations of armed conflict should prepare such plans
on a voluntary basis. If other countries wish to draw
up similar national plans, they have the right, not the
obligation, to do so.

Russia is convinced that there exists a significant
and positive potential for women to participate in
various aspects of armed conflict settlement and post-
conflict recovery. The Council and relevant agencies
and mechanisms of the United Nations system must
pay more attention to ways to involve women in such
processes, as required under resolution 1325 (2000). We
also support the proposals on considering gender-based
issues when establishing peacekeeping contingents. We
also note the importance ofincluding such issues in the
mandates of those missions. At the same time, we must
deal with such matters not with a standard model but by
taking into account the specific characteristics of each
situation.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our belief
that ensuring the rights of women and their protection
in armed conflict will be possible only through the joint
efforts of all interested parties, including civil society.
The guideline for us all on this issue continues to be
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

