The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Jaf
for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.

It is an honour for me to preside over this debate,
and it is the wish of Uruguay to express its thanks to
everyone who has come here today to address a theme
that requires our constant attention and which is an
essential part of the agenda on women and peace and
security. This is an agenda to which we adhere, and
we endorse the statement to be delivered by Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security.

Uruguay decided to convene this open debate in the
conviction that sexual violence constitutes one of the
worst attacks against human dignity. In the framework
of international human rights law, sexual violence is
also a direct attack on dignity. It is an attack on the
right to freedom and honour and, of course, an attack
on the right to life. We should recall that, under the
definition in the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
sexual violence carried out by the State itself is to be
considered as torture.

On the basis of resolution 1325 (2000) and other
resolutions and complementary documents, we have
strengthened the normative framework so as to address
that problem. Despite all those efforts, however, it is
a matter of concern to read the contents of the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/249) indicating
the ongoing nature of sexual violence, which is used
by terrorist groups, violent extremists, non-State armed
groups and also by some State actors.

Sexual violence used systematically becomes
a tactic of war and an act of terrorism, manifesting
itself through abhorrent practices, which include rape,
sexual slavery, prostitution, forced marriage, as well
as pregnancies, abortions and forced sterilization.
In the context of a conflict situation, we know that
the systematic, organized and even planned use of
sexual violence, directed especially against the most
vulnerable groups of the civilian population, constitutes
barbaric tools, which have been developed by terrorist
groups such as Da'esh, Boko Haram, Al-Nusra and
Al-Shabaab. Sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terrorism thus becomes a lethal weapon ofwar. It causes
physical harm but, even worse, it attacks what is most
valuable to human beings: their dignity. It destroys and
dehumanizes women, girls, boys and men.

Victims who have suffered the effects of sudden
sexual violence require, where possible, a long and
costly recuperation, which has a direct impact on
the social fabric, economic development, family life
and on everything that depends on civil society for
its development. The long-term costs of the use of
sexual violence in conflicts are much deeper and more
complex than they may at first appear. Once again, we
in the Organization find ourselves confirming the fact
that prevention and early warning is where we must
focus our efforts to prevent the occurrence of such
undesirable acts and all of their costly ramifications.

For those reasons, given the gravity and complexity
of the problem, the international community must
produce swift, coordinated and comprehensive
responses. Uruguay supports the suggestions contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on conflict-
related sexual violence and considers them appropriate.

First, empowering women is essential. The
common denominator of sexual violence is that it finds
fertile ground where there are pre-existing patterns of
structural discrimination based on gender. Women must
therefore have access to education and employment and
must participate in decision-making processes in order
to reaffirm their integrity and value as human beings.

We reiterate that there must be increased participation
by women in the areas of mediation, prevention and
conflict resolution, as highlighted in resolution 1325
(2000). Their capacity for rapprochement, negotiation,
understanding and empathy in such situations is more
than proven. Uruguay firmly believes that. The increase
in the number of women in peacekeeping operations in
which Uruguay participates has enriched the quality of
the contingents. In missions such as the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we can attest to the effective role
of women in creating confidence in local communities,
for reasons already mentioned, and, furthermore, in
individuals who have been victims of sexual violence.

Secondly, as mentioned at the beginning, attention
must be paid to the recovery and reintegration ofvictims.
Victims require a minimum support that involves
medical and psychosocial care, including sexual and
reproductive health care. Although at the beginning
I mentioned that the main victims of sexual violence
are women, girls, boys and adolescents, men too are
victims. Civil society as a whole is a group vulnerable
to the aberrant practice. Rape, enforced sterilization,
the transmission of AIDS, genital violence and
castration are all forms of sexual violence that are used
as weapons of war and terrorism. The humiliation and
social rejection suffered by victims is a responsibility
that Governments, civil society organizations and
community and religious leaders must bear in mind and
attend to with all the appropriate means in order to be
able to effectively mend the social fabric.

Similarly, girls and boys born of war and produced
by sexual violence - by women being raped - are
invisible victims, who from the time they are born are
denied another fundamental human right: the right to
a name. As mentioned today, in many cases girls and
boys born of rape are considered to be children of
the enemy and face a life of rejection and exclusion.
They continue to be denied fundamental rights and
to be deprived of access to basic services such as
medical care and education. Nonetheless, those girls
and boys are also members of society, and steps must
be taken for their education, integration, inclusion and
social acceptance so as to prevent a vicious circle that
perpetuates violence.

Thirdly, we believe that these crimes must be
condemned because accountablility is fundamental to
ensuring that they do not go unpunished. They must
not remain unpunished. We cannot forget that memory,
truth, justice and the adoption of new legal, cultural
and social changes, among others, are the links in the
only chain than can guarantee that events that lead
to conflict do not recur and that at the same time can
restore dignity to the victims.

We States must increase our efforts to ensure that
those who are guilty of such crimes are brought to
justice, at both the domestic and international levels.
In that regard, the International Criminal Court plays
an essectial role in judging those crimes that have
been recognized by the Rome Statute as war crimes,
crimes against humanity or even crimes of genocide. In
addition, let us recall that the use of sexual violence in
conflicts is also considered to be a risk factor indicator
in the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, a
document issued in 2014 by the United Nations Office
on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to
Protect. It is therefore up to the Security Council to
ensure that crimes of sexual violence are referred to
the International Criminal Court and that such cases
continue to be monitored. The Security Council must
also ensure that the theme ofsexual violence is addressed
in all of the relevant sanctions committees and that the
names of the alleged perpetrators of sexual violence are
systematically included on their sanctions lists.

In the context of peacekeeping operations, we
believe that addressing sexual violence in conflict is an
essential part of protecting civilians and a fundamental
aspect of the mandate of such operations. As such, all
available means must be employed in furtherance of
and in defence of such mandates.

Uruguay wishes to express its support for the
work of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, in
particular its efforts to end impunity for such crimes.
We deeply appreciate the positive impact of the roster
of legal experts from UN-Women and Justice Rapid
Response, who have worked with United Nations bodies
and States to promote accountability in cases of sexual
and gender-based violence.

It can be concluded that a fragmented approach is
not an appropriate response to sexual violence used as
a tactic of war and terrorism in conflict. The isolated
efforts of one country or groups of countries, civil
society or the organs and agencies of this Organization
are not enough to eradicate it. Only concerted action will
allow us to respond effectively to that terrible scourge.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Minister of Defence
of Sweden.

