Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): We thank the Russian
presidency for convening this open debate. We
appreciate the leadership and commitment of the
Security Council to gender equality in international
peace and security. We especially commend Spain and
the United Kingdom for their efforts in establishing and
co-chairing the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security. 1 would also like to commend the
UN-Women and its partners for their numerous ongoing
initiatives related to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Slovakia welcomes the establishment
in September of the women and peace and security
national focal point network, which will periodically
share and exchange lessons learned and best practices.

While aligning ourselves with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union, I
wish briefly to highlight a few additional points in my
national capacity.

As pointed out by speakers before me, the challenge
we face in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda is not a lack of a normative
framework, but rather the significant gaps that exist
when it comes to its implementation. That is a fact
despite the overwhelming evidence of the contributions
women bring to prevention and peacebuilding efforts
as agents of Change. Resolution 2242 (2015) provides
a critical tool for the international community to make
tangible progress towards gender equality and peace.

The equal participation and involvement of women
in peace and security is a cross-cutting issue and gender
expertise is needed in all areas, including security sector
reform. The participation and involvement of women is
key to operational effectiveness, local ownership and
strengthened oversight. Increasing the recruitment of
female staff, preventing human rights violations and
collaborating with women's organizations contribute
to creating an efficient, accountable and participatory
security sector that responds to the special needs of
both women and men.

Slovakia underlines the importance of the effective
implementation of resolution 2151 (2014), on security
sector reform. That landmark resolution underscores
the importance of the equal and effective participation
and full involvement of women in all stages of
security sector reform. It underlines the vital role of
women in preventing conflict and in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, as well as in strengthening civilian
protection measures in security services during the
reconstruction process. It suggests including more
women in training for security personnel and calls
for effective vetting processes in order to exclude
perpetrators of sexual violence from the security sector.

In conclusion, we underline our continued support
for the zero-tolerance policy of the United Nations and
the approach of zero impunity for all military, police
and civilian personnel of the United Nations in the area
of prevention and protection against sexual violence in
peacekeeping operations. We support resolution 2272
(2016), which requested that the Secretary-General
assess whether a Member State had taken steps to
investigate allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse,
held the perpetrators accountable and informed him
about the progress of investigations when determining
its participation in peacekeeping operations.

