The President: I should like to thank the
representative of Malaysia for the kind words he
addressed to my delegation.

Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine) Mr. President, my
delegation warmly welcomes you as you preside over
this meeting of the Security Council.

I should also like to thank you and the delegation
of Namibia for organizing this open meeting and giving
the Council an excellent opportunity to have a broad
exchange of views and proposals aimed at finding
effective ways to protect women and to ensure their
full participation in efforts to maintain peace and
security.

We thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement this morning, as well as Ms. King, Assistant
Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, and Ms. Heyzer,
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM), for their contribution to
our discussion.

The question before us today is a complex one. It
should also be borne in mind that a number of organs
within the United Nations system are addressing
various aspects of this issue, and a number of specific
policies and recommendations in this respect have been
worked out.

We would like to particularly commend the
United Nations Development Fund for Women for its
efforts to ensure that women are half of every solution.
We would also like to underscore the important
contribution of non-United Nations bodies and
humanitarian agencies, as well as non-governmental
organizations, in protecting women in armed conflicts
and providing them humanitarian assistance and other
necessary relief. The Security Council should provide
its own perspective on the question of women's
protection and women's role in the maintenance of
peace and security, in accordance with its own
mandate.

International resolve to safeguard women's rights
in conflict situations has substantially strengthened in
recent years. In response to the increased targeting of
women and other civilians that has become a shameful
instrument of contemporary warfare, the international
community has further developed, in addition to the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the two Additional
Protocols of 1977, a body of law dealing with crimes
against civilian populations, with special emphasis on
the protection of women. The Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court incorporates gender-based
prosecution within its jurisdiction and lists rape,
enforced prostitution and other forms of sexual
violence as war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The ad hoc Tribunal for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia both explicitly incorporate rape as a crime
against humanity within their jurisdiction. The statute
of the Rwanda Tribunal also expressly includes rape,
enforced prostitution and any form of indecent assault
as a violation of article 3 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and a breach of Additional Protocol II.
Apart from that, the Security Council has adopted
several resolutions on the protection of children and
civilians in armed conflict wherein it urged all parties
to take special measures to protect women and girls
from rape and other forms of gender-based violence.

However, in spite all international efforts, women
continue to be the most vulnerable victims of armed
conflicts. With a rapid proliferation of inter-State wars
and other hostilities, civilians increasingly represent
the overwhelming majority of war victims, with
women and girls targeted for the most brutal forms of
attack, including rape, sexual mutilation, sexually
humiliating treatment and forcible impregnation.
Sexual violence brings with it the risk of HIV/AIDS.
The increase in inter-State and inter-ethnic hostilities
in the last decade and the increased number of refugees
became a catalyst for a major explosion in the spread
of the disease, and it has yet to show up statistically. In
addition to that, women also experience the trauma of
losing relatives and friends in times of armed conflict
and of having to take responsibility for the care of
surviving family members. They also constitute the
majority of refugees and displaced persons.

My country is greatly concerned about this
situation and strongly condemns the targeting of
women in situations of armed conflict. In this context, I
would like to stress that the Security Council should
give special consideration to the particular needs of
women affected by armed conflict when considering
action aimed at promoting peace and security.

It is important that the Secretary-General's reports
to the Council dealing with specific conflict situations
and developments in the field also incorporate gender
perspectives in addressing various aspects of conflict
analysis and conflict resolution. I share the view
expressed by previous speakers that the Council should
also request the Secretary-General to ensure that
personnel involved in United Nations peacekeeping
and peace-building operations have appropriate
training on the protection, rights and particular needs
of women. Security Council resolutions setting up or
extending peacekeeping operations should provide a
clear mandate to address the protection of women and
girls affected by conflict against all sexual violence,
abduction, enforced prostitution, trafficking and threats
imposed by military, paramilitary and other groups.

We believe the Security Council has a special
responsibility to support women's participation in
peace processes by ensuring respective gender balance
in United Nations peacekeeping missions. The Council
has already recognized, through the statement of its
President on the occasion of International Women's
Day, the important role of women in conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and peace-building and has
underscored the importance of promoting an active and
visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective
into all policies and programmes when addressing
armed or other conflicts.

My delegation heartily applauds the efforts and
dedication of all women serving United Nations
peacekeeping and humanitarian missions under very
difficult and quite frequently dangerous circumstances
in conflict and post-conflict areas. The presence of
women in United Nations missions can foster
confidence and trust among the local population,
critical elements in any peacekeeping mission. In
performing their tasks, women are perceived to be
compassionate, unwilling to opt for force over
reconciliation, willing to listen and learn and are
widely seen as contributors to an environment of
stability and morality that fosters the progress of peace.

At the same time, women are still under-
represented in decision-making with regard to conflict.
Their initiatives and visions for peace and security are
rarely heard of during peace negotiations. In this
regard, I would like to stress that women should not be
viewed primarily as victims of armed conflict; the
international community should use the potential of
women as agents of preventive diplomacy,
peacekeeping and peace-building. The peace-building
initiatives of women in Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Cambodia, Rwanda,
Mozambique and Guatemala indicate how precious
their contribution to peace can be.
Being an active participant of the United Nations
peacekeeping and peacemaking efforts, Ukraine has
also contributed women civilian police to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We reiterate our
readiness to continue working constructively with other
Members States in order to ensure the protection of
women in armed conflicts and women's participation in
peace processes. We are confident that further
development of peacekeeping and peace-building
teams, with women and men as equal partners, would
improve the efficiency of peacekeeping and peace
maintenance throughout the world.

The delegation of Ukraine looks forward to a
positive outcome of this important initiative on the
women and peace and security. We hope that many
useful ideas put forward by many delegations at this
meeting will be incorporated in the respective Security
Council draft resolution.

The President: I thank the representative of
Ukraine for his kind words addressed to me and my
delegation.


