Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate and for the great commitment of your country
and all Council members in their recent visit to
Colombia. I am sure that, after the Council's visit to
my country, delegations were able to see first-hand how
important the gender issue has been in the negotiations
on the peace agreement and going forward in the
implementation phase.

Colombia endorses the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security. I would
like to begin by mentioning the progress noted in the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Colombia (S/2017/252) and the support
given by the Office of Special Representative Bangura,
who personally, along with Executive Director of UN-
Women Mlambo-Ngcuka, travelled to Havana and
were able to see first-hand the process as it developed
and to publicly express their commitment to providing
support to survivors of sexual violence in our country.
It is worth underscoring the strategy designed by the
peace process negotiators, as there were many women
team members; the gender subcommittee that was
established and which ensured that whatever was
agreed would meet the particular needs of women and
girls; and that, in the implementation phase, 20 per cent
of the military and civilian observers of the special
political mission designated by the Security Council
are now women.

As the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs ofUruguay
and other members said this morning, it is important
that women be actively involved in the peace process
and now in the implementation process. In the light of
the recommendation in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/249), Colombia is committed to ensuring that
the mechanisms stemming from the agreement place
particular attention on the rights of victims, including
victims of sexual violence, in particular women and
girls, in the context of the armed conflict in my country.

I would also like to underscore the establishment
of the Truth Commission and the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, which define crimes of sexual violence
committed in the framework of the armed conflict as
crimes that do not qualify for amnesty. We must know
the truth about all these events, sentence those who
committed them and provide reparations for victims. A
second important step that was taken in the legislative
area is the approval this month in the Congress of
the Republic of the constitutional amendment that
establishes a special jurisdiction for peace and a unit
in charge of investigations, which will include a special
team for cases of sexual violence.

The peace agreements reached in Colombia are just
a road map that will allow us to initiate a long process
of reconciliation, which could be more challenging, as
it requires restoring victims' rights and establishing
decent living conditions in the countryside. In the peace
agreement, we envisioned that this process would take
at least 15 years and the women and peace and security
agenda will play a crucial role.

Colombia recognizes the impetus and contributions
provided by civil society, which has been mentioned
throughout this open debate, especially women's
organizations, which played an active role in the
Council's recent visit. Council members were able
to interact with women's organizations and it added
real substance to the human rights and peacebuilding
agenda because these organizations are the ones
that contribute and help the Government effectively
implement early warning and prevention mechanisms
to address sexual violence.

Finally, we are aware that enormous challenges still
lie ahead and I am certain that international cooperation
will be key to finding solutions and to sharing
experiences and lessons learned, which may be useful
for other countries. We therefore offer our experiences
as to how we have been able to make progress in
providing redress to victims of sexual violence.

