Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank you, Madam President,
for convening this resumed debate.

The Secretary-General calls for bold and urgent
action in his report (S/2019/800). He has also reminds
Member States that commitments have not been
matched by action. In his briefing to the Security
Council on 29 October, the Secretary-General noted
alarming increases in political violence targeting
women in conflict-affected zones. He reported an
alarming increase in conflict-related sexual violence.
The Secretary-General reminded us that deep-seated
inequalities meant that women are far less likely to
access education, health and economic opportunities
than men in conflict-affected areas. The rhetoric and
implementation gap is heart-wrenching. The Secretary-
General's report confirms that we are facing a growing
implementation deficit, the United Nations is facing
a trust deficit and both of those trends are fuelling
cynicism in our commitment to the women and peace
and security agenda. We shall ignore them at our
own peril.

There is one aspect of the United Nations women
and peace and security agenda related to United Nations
peacekeeping that I want to especially highlight. More
and more of the peacekeeping interventions are in
areas exposed to the climate crisis, whereas more and
more conflicts are triggered or intensified by it. Water
stress, desertification, depletion of food resources and
extreme weather events all fuel and intensify conflict.
The Pacific Islands Forum's Boe Declaration of 2018
recognized climate change as the single greatest threat
faced by our people and countries - a perspective
increasingly shared by many other countries.

Globally, we know that the vast majority of the
United Nations peacekeeping operations today, its
political missions and its policing missions are in regions
severely affected by the climate crisis. One or another
expression of the crisis may have fuelled or contributed
to a worsening of the levels of conflict. The women and
peace and security framework will increasingly need
to be a climate crisis-informed one. It is not so today.
Food is weaponized in conflicts, water is weaponized
in conflicts, health and education are weaponized in
conflicts and gender is weaponized in conflicts. All of
those affect women harshly, severely and with greater
brutality. United Nations peace operations and the
Organizations political interventions in conflict zones
will increasingly need to respond to that. There are still
far too many steps to take.

The need for the equal participation of women in
peace processes, mediation, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding cannot be overstated. Peace is more
likely to survive stresses if women are centre-stage.
We also know that fragile regions are likely to return
to conflict and that women suffer disproportionately
when they do. When women are brought into the heart
of peacebuilding, we find far better integration of
humanitarian, development and security interventions.
The result is the durability of peace. The chances of
sliding back into conflict are reduced as a result.
Remarkably, men benefit a lot more when security
is returned.

The United Nations is also paying more attention
to the role ofwomen in United Nations policing. United
Nations policing - this week especially - is already
playing important roles in mediating climate-induced
conflicts, such as around livestock grazing rights
and access to water. That role will only become more
pronounced. The increased participation of women in
policing is a very important part of the solution, but
it is only a starting point. Fiji is proud that women
make up over 40 per cent of Fijian police officers
deployed in United Nations policing operations today
in South Sudan and Darfur. We are close to achieving
the 18 per cent target for women in all United Nations
peace operations. Those commitments respond to the
women and peace and security agenda as well as the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Far more important,
however, they respond to our own insights derived
from 40 years of peacekeeping. Women peacekeepers
are better at diffusing tensions and identifying early
signs of conflict-related sexual violence. Women are
always more insightful in identifying early-warning
conflict stressors.

The full version of our statement will be
circulated promptly.

