Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal): I would like to
thank the German presidency of the Security Council
for convening today's open debate on this very
important issue.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
with that delivered earlier by the representative of
Canada on behalf of 55 countries.

Portugal greatly values that the Council continues
to pay attention to and acts upon the women and peace
and security agenda, an essential tool for preventing
conflict and ensuring more effective responses to
today's complex crises. We fully agree that we need to
do more to prevent sexual violence in conflict. In that
sense, we commend today's adoption of resolution 2467
(2019), with its survivor-centred approach that helps
shift the stigma of sexual violence from the victims to
the perpetrators, as well as the fact that the resolution
addresses the importance of prevention to the great
challenges faced by women and girls, in particular,
sexual violence in conflict. Moreover, we need to ensure
that victims of violence, including sexual violence,
have the right to protection and reparation, and that the
perpetrators are held accountable.

Portugal has been implementing resolution 1325
(2000) since the development of our first national
action plan, in 2009. In this regard, allow me to
highlight that our third national action plan - for the
term 2019-2022 - includes a strategic goal to protect
the human rights of women and girls and punishes
all forms of violence against them, including sexual
violence. Within this goal, our target is to integrate
the women and peace and security agenda and gender
equality, including violence against women and girls,
sexual violence and human trafficking, into our legal
and judicial cooperation in the context of implementing
resolution 2106 (2013). We also seek to promote and
support all activities related to investigation and
punishment of all cases of violations against women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations and
humanitarian crises.

Accordingly, we recognize that the promotion of
gender-equality and non-discrimination perspectives
within the various fields of public policy and
development cooperation is imperative if we are to
ensure the full enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for everyone. Furthermore, we
consider it to be of the utmost importance enhancing
training to military- and security-forces personnel
on issues related to human rights, international
humanitarian law, gender equality and violence against
women and girls, including on sexual violence and
gender-based violence, not the least of which is the
institutionalization of gender advisers in all branches
of the armed forces.

In conclusion, let me underline that preventing
sexual violence in conflict is possible only if all
stakeholders are involved in finding durable solutions.
In this regard, it is essential to work closely with civil
society, as was underlined by our distinguished briefers
this morning. In fact, civil society organizations
often play an instrumental role in ensuring the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, including by complementing the work done by
military, security and civilian personnel in conflict and
post-conflict settings and in situations of emergency.
They are often essential elements in preventing and
reporting crimes, alerting the international community
to such crimes, restoring the internal stability of the
States, supporting the reconstruction of countries and
helping the population to recover.

