Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the initiative of the Russian Federation
in convening this open debate on woman and peace
and security.

We acknowledge and express our appreciation
for the briefings by the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women, as well as the
statement made by the representative of Slovenia on
behalf of the Human Security Network.

We also align ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of resolution 1325 (2010).

The women and peace and security agenda is
a priority of Chile's multilateral foreign policy. We
therefore promote strengthening cooperation at regional
and global levels and establishing public policies at
country level. In the global context, we would like to
point out our co-sponsorship of Spain's initiative to
create a network of national focal points on women
and peace and security. As a founding member of the
network, Chile reaffirms its commitment to continue
supporting and developing women's participation in
decision-making in all spheres.

Accordingly, Chile is currently implementing its
second national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000)
under the coordination of a tripartite inter-ministerial
network to promote gender mainstreaming in all
predeployment training for peacekeeping personnel
from our country. The inter-ministerial bureau will
soon be joined by citizen observer, whose task will be
to monitor the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in Chile, with the participation of various stakeholders
including civil society.

Furthermore, Chile is committed to increasing
women's participation in various United Nations
missions. We are convinced of their contribution and
undeniable role in establishing effective ties in restoring
the confidence of women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict situations. This year we have deployed a
senior officer in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and 11 Chilean women will participate as
observers in the United Nations Mission in Colombia.
As of 2017, women's access will be ensured to all
military professions. That will be extended in 2018
to include the navy and the air force. That will enable
Chilean women to be deployed in various areas of
peacekeeping missions.

At the regional level we highlight Chile and
Argentina's bilateral plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) through the Joint Peace Force of
the Southern Cross.

In another area, Chile appreciates the
recommendations concerning the global study on
resolution 1325 (2000) set out in the latest report
(S/2016/822) of the Secretary-General. We emphasize
the importance of enhancing the participation and
leadership of women as a central aspect of peace and
security initiatives.

We should not just think about the numerical
increase of women in peace operations, but should
also include a gender perspective in the planning and
conduct of missions. As noted by the Secretary-General
in his report, the participation of women should not be
limited to certain phases; it is necessary throughout the
conflict cycle to achieve sustainable peace.

Finally, women are agents of change and contribute
to building more just and egalitarian societies. We
must thererfore take advantage of their rich potential.
As noted by the Secretary-General last year during
his visit to Chile, empowering women and girls is the
smartest investment that the international community
can make to ensure a future ofjustice and peace for all.

