Mr. Roet (Israel): This debate marks the fourteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and provides an
important opportunity to address the persistent and
emerging gaps to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.

Last week, I read a story about Amsha, a Yazidi
woman from northern Iraq who was captured by Daesh
in August. Amsha watched in horror as jihadi fighters
separated the men. Her husband was ordered to lie face
down on the ground. One by one the jihadists passed
over the men and shot them in the head. The women
were taken to Mosul and held prisoner with hundreds of
other women and girls. Every day, men entered the room
to pick out a girl. They sold Amsha for $12. The man
who bought her viciously raped and beat her. Stories
such as that of Amsha are emerging every day. Their
testimonies - forced conversions, forced marriage,
sexual assault, displacement and slavery - are what
we would expect to read about in the Dark Ages, not in
the twenty-first century.

Daesh is just one of the radical extremist groups
that seek to subjugate women. There is Boko Haram
in Nigeria, Al-Qaida in Yemen, like-minded militias in
Libya, Al-Shabaab in the East Africa, and Hamas in
Gaza. They seek to control every area of a woman's
life - how she dresses, where she goes, how she spends
her money, who she marries and how many children
she has. The Holy Bible tells us that there is a time
for everything and a season for every activity under
the heavens. It is therefore a great disappointment
that where we see those vast injustices and atrocities
towards women around the globe, as well as great
opportunities for the advancement of women, a leading
Arab country decided to use this forum to advance
narrow political goals by aattacking my country. The
issue is far too important for all of us and there should
be no politicization of the matter.

Around the world, women continue to be
marginalized and minimized. Today, the majority of the
world's poor are women. They earn only three-quarters
as much as men and are frequently locked out of
leadership and decision-making positions. The tragedy
is that when women face barriers to achieving their
potential, entire societies suffer. The truth of the matter
is that women's economic empowerment lies at the
heart of sustainable development. We know that, when
a woman generates her own income, she reinvests
90 per cent of it in her family and community, and
we know that eliminating gender gaps in labour force
participation can lead to bigjumps in income per capita.
To put it more simply, when we boost the participation
of women, we boost the growth potential of an entire
nation. Supporting women's economic empowerment
requires meaningful policy intervention, beginning
with the inclusion of women in the decision-making
process. Women bring unique ideas, priorities and
expertise to bear on challenging political problems.
Creating opportunities for women and girls advances
security and prosperity for everyone.

Take Rwanda, for example. Rwanda's legal system
guarantees equal rights in terms of land ownership
and inheritance, and its Constitution enshrines gender
equality. Thanks to that strategy, Rwanda tops the
world for women in Parliament with 53 per cent in 2013,
and the nation has made impressive progress towards
reducing poverty and inequality.

Israel understands the tremendous benefits of
investing in every member of society. We celebrate
different ways of life, we value diversity, and we believe
that every person should choose how to live his or her
life. From the prophets Deborah to Miriam and Queen
Esther, Jewish history is rich with female leaders. More
recently, courageous women from Hannah Senesh
to Dorit Beinisch have left their mark on the Jewish
people and the Jewish State. In fact, our Declaration of
Independence was signed by two women, Golda Meir
and Rachel Cohen-Kagan, and Israel had a female Prime
Minister before many other countries granted women
the right to vote. In Israel, we understand that women's
participation is a game changer. That is why two of the
past three chief justices of our Supreme Court have
been women, and the current Israeli Parliament has
more women than ever before. In recent years, Israel
has welcomed its first female Major General, elected a
female Governor to our central bank, and three women
were appointed to head our leading banks. Israeli
women are agents of change, drivers of progress and
makers of peace.

Given the chance, that could be true for all the
world's women, but we have work to do. We must
persist in our efforts to advance gender equality until
all women can dress as they like, be educated as they
choose, work where they wish, marry the person they
love, raise their families as they see fit and make the
choices that will determine the course of their lives.
It is up to us to uphold those freedoms. So I urge
everyone - all women and men who wish to see a more
peaceful planet i to bet on women, invest in women,
ensure that they have opportunities, support their right
to be a part of the decision-making process. I promise
that we will not be disappointed.

