Mr. Macs (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
welcome your initiative, Madam President, to convene
under the presidency of Nigeria this open debate on
sexual violence in conflict. The Secretary-General's
presentation and his regular participation in open
debates on this topic show the commitment to the fight
against sexual violence at the highest level within
the United Nations. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative, Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her
intervention, and especially for the exemplary work she
is carrying out with the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. I would like to
assure them of the full support of my delegation. Our
thanks go too to Ms. Rhoda Misak, who compellingly
gave voice to civil society - an indispensable partner
in the fight against sexual violence. I fully associate
myself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of
the European Union.

Since our last open debate on sexual violence in
June 2013 (see S/PV.6984), new conflicts have broken
out and others have intensified. The magnitude of the
phenomenon has intensified proportionately, showing,
unfortunately, that sexual violence goes hand in hand
with conflict. I refer to the conflict in Darfur, which
continues to deteriorate, and to that in South Sudan,
where, as Ms. Misak has just outlined, the fighting
that erupted since 15 December 2013 has led to serious
violations of human rights, including a great number
of cases of sexual violence. I refer, too, to the Central
African Republic, where sexual violence has been
the main feature of the attacks carried out against the
civilian population since March 2013.
In Syria, sexual violence has been a constant
since the beginning of the conflict. The independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic gathered information showing that
Government forces and affiliated militias have
committed sexual violence, including rape, in detention
centres and prisons across the country, often during
interrogations conducted by intelligence services. We
also know that certain armed groups in Syria have also
committed such violence. All of these conflicts and the
other situations addressed in the annual report of the
Secretary-General lead us to the conclusion that the
Security Council must remain mobilized in the face
of these despicable practices that deliberately target
civilian populations and destroy the social fabric of
entire communities.

Last year's open debate focused on the fight against
impunity. That topic remains relevant. It is at the heart
of our efforts to end sexual violence. Condemning the
perpetrators of sexual violence does not mean only
punishing the guilty parties but also preventing future
violence, righting wrongs and doing justice by victims
and survivors. The international community must step
up its efforts to support national authorities to assume
their responsibility in the fight against impunity.
The partnership between Justice Rapid Response,
UN-Women and the Institute for International Criminal
Investigations is a good example of what can be done.
Luxembourg supports that partnership, which has made
it possible to establish a list of specialized experts
who can be rapidly deployed to lead and participate in
investigations and to provide assistance to the victims
of acts of sexual and gender-based violence in conflict
settings.

Along with strengthening national capacities, there
must be continued support for international criminal
justice so it can play its role in cases where States
either fail to live up to their obligations or lack the will
to do so. I would like to reiterate the importance that
Luxembourg attaches to the role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The Security Council is
responsible for considering all of the means at its
disposal to combat sexual violence, including referral
to the ICC.

In recent years, the information available to us on
cases of sexual violence has increased in both quantity
and quality. Procedures for the monitoring, analysis
and communication of information on sexual violence
have begun to be implemented following the adoption
of resolution 1960 (2010). It would be advisable to
accelerate the implementation of those procedures, as
envisaged in resolution 2106 (2013). It is also critical
that advisors on the protection of women continue to
be deployed in a systematic way. The Security Council
should also ensure that it systematically takes into
account the prevention of sexual Violence in framing
country-specific resolutions and in considering the
renewal of the mandates of peacekeeping missions and
special policy missions.

We commend applaud the efforts of the United
Nations campaign against sexual violence conflict,
headed by Ms. Bangura, in particular the preparation
of early warning indicators for cases of conflict-related
sexual violence addressed by United Nations missions
in Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Sudan.

The struggle against sexual violence can succeed
only if the States concerned, the United Nations and all
its Member States mobilize and unify their efforts. In
that context, we welcome the signature on the sidelines
of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly
of the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict. That initiative, which has since
been endorsed by more than 140 countries, shows the
will of the international community to put an end to
that scourge. We hope that the June follow-up Global
Summit in London will lead to the adoption of further
specific commitments.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate that
Luxembourg will maintain its firm commitment to
ensuring that the struggle against sexual violence is
taken into account as a priority by the Council and that
the Council's resolutions are translated into solutions
on the ground, to borrow Ms. Bangura's expression.

