Mr. N atalegawa (Indonesia): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Viet Nam's
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
present month and to express my appreciation to you
for convening this open debate. I also wish to extend
our congratulations to the United States delegation on
the successful deliberations during its presidency last
month.

I would like to extend my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for providing us with a progress
report (S/2009/465) on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and for the recommendations
contained therein. Ahead of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in October 2010,
we have an opportunity today in this open debate to
advance women's participation in conflict prevention
and resolution and in peacebuilding.

Armed conflict is devastating to any human
being. However, it has disproportionate effects on
women and girls. Their voices are silenced in conflict
and their basic rights lost in the political and social
deterioration that accompanies conflict. They become
disempowered. A few days ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1888 (2009). That was
another commendable endeavour to further strengthen
the efforts of the international community to combat
sexual violence in armed conflicts.

There is still, however, much action that can be
taken by the international community to address the
challenges faced by women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We should continue to promote
at all levels awareness of the Geneva Convention of
1949 on the protection of civilians. The international
community should continue to devise strategies to ease
the bleak and harsh reality faced every day, particularly
by women and girls living in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Nonetheless, our strategies ultimately must not
merely treat women and girls as victims; they should
also be a central part of peace agreements. Women are
key partners in the post-conflict transformation
process. Women should be enabled and empowered to
play an active role in the many spheres of post-conflict
life beyond earning livelihoods by also participating in
political and peacebuilding processes. That should be
promoted in a systematic way.

The role of women in post-conflict situations is
paramount. Women serve as one of the main building
blocks and instruments of peace. Yet, due to continuing
violence during conflict, women face physical, mental
and social barriers in post-conflict situations that
undermine their role in peace. The international
community must recognize and address that challenge
effectively. Towards that end, international support
should meet the multidimensional needs of women and
girls in post-conflict situations. That objective needs to
be met with adequate funding.

During our deliberations on this issue last year,
Indonesia recognized the need to facilitate the full and
effective participation of women in all stages of peace
processes and peacebuilding. Indonesia supports more
women playing key roles in peacekeeping missions,
including as military and police personnel. For its part,
Indonesia has sent female personnel as military
observers, staff officers and members of our
contingents in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We should also ensure that peacekeepers have
adequate capacity to carry out provisions related to
gender issues. Moreover, it is important that provisions
on sexual violence within the mandates of
peacekeeping missions be in line with other provisions,
such as protection of civilians; they should be
developed with a clear and comprehensive concept.
Mandatory training for all peacekeeping personnel on
addressing sexual violence should be continued and
supported.

The international community must help to restore
peace in conflict areas with the participation of women.
We commend the continued effort to incorporate a
gender perspective in all policies and programmes of
the United Nations system, facilitated by a strong
gender entity within the United Nations. However, we
note that gender-targeted projects in post-conflict areas
remain limited. The United Nations should promote
gender role modelling, taking into consideration the
perspective of developing countries in post-conflict
situations.

The Security Council, in accordance with its
mandate should continue to address the root cause of
violence against women in armed conflict. At the same
time, the role of women should continue to be
promoted in sustaining peace following conflict.

For those reasons, Indonesia very much
welcomes the Council's adoption of resolution 1889
(2009) earlier today.

