Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
public meeting.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a determining factor
for strengthening the place of women in Security
Council actions for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. As we meet today, almost two years after the
adoption of that resolution, it is high time to see how
much progress has been accomplished and how much
remains to be done.

(spoke in English)

As we have heard this morning, accountability is
crucial to progress on this area as on other areas of
human security. In that regard, Canada was pleased to
co-fund the assessment by the Women's Commission
for Refugee Women and Children of the guidelines of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the protection of refugee women. The
issue of accountability for the protection of refugee
women is a major element of that assessment exercise,
made further relevant by recent allegations of sexual
extortion in West Africa. We look forward to effective
follow-up and implementation of the recommendations
of the assessment.

Progress has also been made in mainstreaming
gender considerations into international humanitarian
and criminal law. The Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), which came into effect on
1July, contains modern definitions of crimes against
women in conflict situations, such as rape, sexual
slavery and other forms of sexual violence. The Statute
will ensure that the Court will have personnel and
judges with legal and practical expertise in prosecuting
crimes against women and children.

Furthermore, it is expected that the
complementary jurisdiction of the ICC will encourage
States to fulfil their own basic obligations to prevent
and punish crimes. We look forward to efforts by States
members of the Court to assist the Court. Canada will
do its part to facilitate the Court's efforts to prosecute
and deter crimes of sexual violence, including those
that might eventually be committed by peacekeepers
under a United Nations flag. The ICC can be an
invaluable and central part of the international response
to gender-based violence in conflict.

As Angela King noted, many Member States and
the Secretariat are strongly committed to integrating a
gender perspective into efforts to secure and promote
peace, and we commend Mr. Guehenno for his very
encouraging statement this morning. However, while
progress has been made in many areas, our collective
record to date in implementing the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000) is not as strong as it could be or
as effective as it must become. Even a cursory review
of reports by the Secretary-General to the Council and
of associated resolutions is enough to see that gender
issues are still not receiving the attention they warrant.
For the Council, whether in the context of approving
new or renewed peacekeeping mandates or of
reviewing the humanitarian impact of sanctions, gender
implications must be integral to its analysis and to its
decisions.

We urge the Council to be vigorous and persistent
in ensuring that its own resolutions relating to women,
peace and security - and also to the protection of
civilians more generally - are implemented. The
periodic appearances of Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General before the Council present very
useful opportunities to press this issue with people
responsible in the field. Secretariat staff need the tools
and the know-how to integrate gender perspectives into
their work. To date, the development and the use of
such tools have not been adequate. As a result, the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) are not being
implemented sufficiently on the ground.

I agree entirely with the Permanent
Representative of Singapore that, in areas such as this,
specificity is credibility. I call on the Secretariat to go
beyond abstractions and to give us the straight facts.
The graphic presentation of Noeleen Heyzer this
morning made clear how bad the situation still is for
too many women in too many conflicts, and how far we
still have to go to give concrete expression to our
principled aspirations.

In that regard, following your direction, Mr.
President, I should like to ask a question, which is
addressed to Under-Secretary-General Guehenno. In
his speech, he referred to progress in five missions. I
would welcome an indication of how well we are
doing - or perhaps of how well we will be doing - in
some of the other missions that were not mentioned.

We agree with Ms. King that, at Headquarters, it
is essential that gender expertise be established within
individual United Nations departments and agencies,
such as the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), and not simply within the Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women. To that end, we and others will again urge the
Fifth Committee of the General Assembly to authorize
the resources that DPKO needs to be able to integrate
gender perspectives fully into United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We invite Council members
to join in that effort. Without such capacity, efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) in the field will not
succeed. Equally, it is our responsibility as Member
States to implement this important resolution in our
own domestic and international practices and to ensure
that the United Nations system is equipped to do so as
well.

Mr. President, in the light of your wish to make
sure that statements stay a reasonable length, I shall
omit in my oral presentation the description of the
things that Canada is doing domestically, although we
shall circulate our written text.

Finally, we were pleased to convene the first
meeting of the Friends of Women on peace and
security, and we look forward to working in that area
with Chile and other interested countries. We also look
forward to the release of the full reports of the
Secretariat and of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women. In addition, we look forward to
working with other Member States to continue to
promote the integration of gender perspectives into the
work of the United Nations system and to the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We thank you again, Mr. President, for having
provided the general membership with this invaluable
opportunity to discuss with the Council the
implementation of that seminal resolution.

