Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Madam President, for
your tireless efforts during your presidency of the
Security Council this month. We would also like to
thank all the speakers for their important briefings
and welcome the adoption of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/21) earlier today.

I would like to stress the importance of today's
discussion with regard to displaced refugee women and
girls, particularly in the light of the progress achieved
in developing the standards and legal frameworks of
the women and peace and security agenda since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which was further
developed by the Council through the adoption of the
subseqeunt resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013).

In spite of all the efforts carried out to implement the
agenda, we continue to see an unprecedented increase
in the numbers of displaced and refugee women and
girls around the world, in particular in the Middle East.
Recently, due to conflicts and wars, which Violate the
most basic rights of women and girls - and which are
mostly unconventional conflicts, in which at least one
party is a non-State actor - the intensity of violations
and the impunity of the perpetrators have increased.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/693)
and the recommendations contained therein indicate
that much work needs to be done to implement the
women and peace and security agenda and, most
important, to hold accountable the perpetrators of
crimes against women and girls and ensure that they
do not enjoy impunity. In that regard, we would like
to stress the importance for the Security Council to
step up its cooperation with the International Criminal
Court in the referral of all situations in which horrible
crimes are committed against refugees and displaced
women and girls. The necessary measures should be
taken to identify perpetrators of such crimes among
the ranks of those working to protect displaced and
refugee women and girls. Jordan believes that the time
has come to finalize a draft convention on the criminal
accountability ofUnited Nations officials and experts on
United Nations missions, with a View to implementing
a zero-tolerance policy against perpetrators of such
crimes.

Due to the crisis in Syria, Jordan has been hosting
1.5 million Syrian nationals, 51 per cent of which are
women and girls. Jordan is doing its utmost to provide
high levels of protection and services for Syrian women
refugees on its territory, in accordance with the women
and peace and security agenda and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We are doing so in spite ofthe great
economic, social and security burden that we shoulder
due to the refugee crisis, as well as a chronic scarcity
of energy and water resources. Jordan has opened
both its public and private schools to refugee Syrian
children - it is our duty to do so. The number of Syrian
pupils has reached 120,000, both inside and outside the
camps, 94 per cent of them being girls. As a result, on
average, classrooms are overcrowded by 41 per cent.
That has prompted 80 per cent of our schools to adopt a
dual school day. Jordan also recently established special
care centres for refugee children, as well as a centre to
foster a protective educational environment for girls,
in addition to enabling adolescents to obtain necessary
psychological and social support, in cooperation with
UNICEF.

In coordination with specialized United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
active in the Kingdom, Jordan continues its systematic
efforts to organize educational symposiums for
Syrian refugee girls and women, with a special
focus on reproductive and health care services. That
includes workshops to train the staff of NGOs active
in the camps on how to deal with women and girls
who have been subjected to violence and domestic
abuse, in coordination with the family unit of the
Jordanian police. We also provide material support
to microprojects run by women, and particularly in
families headed by women, which are among the most
poor and marginalized families inside and outside the
camps.

Jordan welcomes the promotion of women in
peacekeeping operations, particularly their involvement
in decision-making on issues arising in conflict
settings. The Jordanian armed forces have been
actively favouring the promotion of women's role in
the military with a view to increasing the effectiveness
of the military in peacekeeping operations and special
humanitarian missions, in addition to promoting
the role of women in the Royal Medical Services in
field hospitals in conflict zones. Jordan's military
women have played an important role in the reception,
protection and care of Syrian refugees. In that regard,
we support the proposal to dedicate a special budget
within the United Nations peacekeeping budget to
dispatching specialized women's protection advisers
to all missions and not only a few, as is the current
practice.

In conclusion, I stress that Jordan attaches great
importance to the high-level review on women and
peace and security that is to take place on the occasion
of the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and the comprehensive review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) 15
years after its adoption. That will require the support
of all in promoting the women and peace and security
agenda in a manner commensurate with the challenges
faced and with a View to creating a better future for the

millions of refugee and internally displaced women and
girls.

