Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): My delegation wishes
to thank the French presidency of the Council for
convening this very timely open debate on women
and peace and security. I also wish to extend our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his dedicated
efforts on this issue.

Women can change the world for the better. For
that to happen, national Governments and international
organizations, such as the United Nations, must provide
the space for women to shape key decisions concerning
national security. We are strongly encouraged by
the commitment of the Council to reinvigorating
the discussion on women's participation in peace
and security.

In many ways, the landmark resolution 1325 (2000),
adopted 17 years ago, changed our perception towards
ensuring the increased representation of women at
all levels of decision-making in national, regional
and international institutions and mechanisms for the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, as
well as peacebuilding. Yet, 17 years after the resolution
was adopted, and 40 years after the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, we have far too little to show.

The Maldives is blessed in that it is a peace-loving
and peaceful country. At the same time, we in the
Maldives also recognize women's role in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding as part of the larger
historic and holistic agenda for gender equality and
women's empowerment. The principles of equality and
non-discrimination are at the heart of the Maldives
Constitution. The Maldives has achieved gender parity
in education, with more female graduates than male,
and more women with doctorate degrees in higher
education. Women comprise over 60 per cent of our
civil service and 40 per cent of our judiciary staff,
inclusive of court officers and administrative staff.

National laws have been strengthened with new
laws on sexual harassment, domestic violence and
sexual offences to ensure the protection of women from
sexual, physical and psychological abuse and violence.
As a further step towards women's empowerment, new
policies have been established by President Abdulla
Yameen Abdul Gayoom that guarantee that 30 per cent
of seats in all management boards of State companies
go to women.

Legislation, laws and policies can take us only so
far. As we see it, resolution 1325 (2000), with gender
equality at its core, can be realized only through a
change in our social practices, moving towards a culture
of respect for women, ofinclusivity, ofrecognizing that
women, by virtue ofbeing human, have equals rights as
men. Changing laws are important, but ultimately it is
the change in hearts and minds that matters.

Research shows that seeing more women in positions
of power and decision-making roles can in turn increase
acceptance and, thereby, the perception of women
in decision-making. That is why the Government of
Maldives has focused on ensuring that women have an
equal share in key decisions of the Government. That is
why our police force is celebrated as having the highest
percentage of women in South Asia. That is why, here
at the United Nations, our envoys - our messengers
of peace - must include women at the top levels. As
a symbol of commitment, the Secretary-General could
perhaps increase the number of women as his special
representatives, especially in conflict resolution.

Countries and societies will become stronger, more
prosperous, more stable and, indeed, more peaceful
when women are agents and managers of change. The
Council can and should drive that change. The Council
can do that with more credibility if it is more inclusive,
and the Maldives stands ready to contribute to and be
the partner in shaping our common future - a shared
destiny where women will call the shots.

