Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate,
which is all the more timely given the approaching
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). I also thank the three briefers who have informed
us so eloquently this morning: the Assistant Secretary-
General, the observer of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, and Ms. Elman. I particularly join
the United Kingdom in welcoming a briefing from a
non-governmental organization.
The protection of civilians has become an
increasingly important feature of effective peacekeeping
mandates, and an equally important feature of the
successful execution of those mandates. However, that
same effectiveness and success have also exposed some
significant shortcomings, some of which have already
been related, and New Zealand believes that the Council
must frankly address those shortcomings.

Indeed, we must have, I think, first a very frank
conversation about our understanding and expectations
with respect to the protection of civilians. Having
done that, then we can bring in troop-contributing
countries, police-contributing countries, hosts, donors,
the Secretariat and other stakeholders - all part of a
very open and free conversation. What we have got
to do is to probe beneath what might appear to be a
successful surface, and ask about the impediments to
the implementation of protection mandates, which will
then enable us to explore constructive solutions.

Today's debate is rightly focused on the protection
challenges and needs of women and girls. But while
women and girls must be protected, they cannot be
viewed solely as in need ofprotection. Women and girls
are also important agents for achieving the protection of
civilians. It is widely acknowledged that women have an
important role to play as leaders and decision-makers in
the prevention and resolution of conflict, but while that
is recognized, it is not consistently applied in practice.
For example, women should also be visible in roles
within post-conflict accountability and transitional
justice structures - something that, as well as making
a significant post-conflict contribution, also helps
to encourage women and girls, particularly victims
of sexual violence, to report offences and to follow
through on that complaint.

But there are others whose vulnerability is often
even less acknowledged. Persons with disabilities
and older persons often suffer most in conflict
situations, and yet older women and women and girls
with disabilities are given very little consideration in
terms of their protection needs; nor is there sufficient
recognition of their ability to contribute to protection
efforts, to contribute to conflict settlement, and to
contribute to peacebuilding.

Armed conflict can both lead to disability and
can disproportionately affect persons with existing
disabilities. Persons with disabilities are particularly
vulnerable in conflict. They face compounded
challenges because of physical, communication and
attitudinal barriers. Sudden attacks pose particular
problems and challenges. The deaf cannot always hear
when attackers approach. The blind may not know
the way to safety. Those with intellectual or social
disabilities may not understand what is happening. All
of them are especially vulnerable. In many conflict
situations, older persons and persons with disabilities
are often the first to be forgotten or neglected. Too
often, they are quite simply left behind. They also face
difficulties escaping conflict. With the disintegration
of families and communities, they can become isolated,
destitute and without support systems. They are at
greater risk of exploitation and sexual violence. That is
especially true ofwomen and girls, as was so eloquently
related to us by Ms. Elman. When conflict ends, their
experience and potential for peacebuilding and social
reconstruction - the role they can play - can often be
overlooked and, quite simply, dismissed.

As the representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross pointed out to us,
recognition of the special respect and protection due to
the elderly and persons with disabilities is found in the
Third and Fourth Geneva Conventions, relating to the
evacuation and treatment of persons deprived of their
liberty. The Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities obliges States to take measures to protect
people. States must honour those obligations. When
implementing mandates, particular attention must be
given to the protection challenges and the needs of older
persons with disabilities. Measures that might better
protect these groups should be considered, including
improved monitoring data collection and reporting
on the impact of conflict on these groups, including
improved civilian harm and casualty support. Secondly,
peacekeeper training should focus on the specific needs
and challenges of persons with disabilities and on older
persons. Thirdly, we should specifically address the
situation of persons with disabilities and older persons
in protection-of-civilian strategies and humanitarian
responses. Finally, we should address the inclusion in
peacebuilding efforts of older persons and persons with
disabilities. We need their knowledge, and we need
their experience. It is only with such measures that an
often neglected and highly vulnerable group can be
protected from conflict.

If we address the protection challenges and needs
of women and girls and if we protect older persons and
those with disabilities, we will have gone a long way to
more effective protection-of-civilian mandates overall.
Moreover, we can use the frank conversation I called
for at the beginning of this statement to achieve that
objective.

