Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the French presidency of the Security
Council for convening today's important debate.

I would also like to thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas, member of the
Non-Governmental Organizations Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, and Ms. Michaelle Jean,
Secretary-General of the Organisation internationale
de la Francophonie, for their briefings.

The adoption ofresolution 1325 (2000) was indeed a
turning point in our approach to the issue of women and
their role in the maintenance of peace and security. The
international community has recognized the serious
impact of conflict on the lives of women. It has also
acknowledged the importance of including women in
conflict prevention and in post-conflict mediation. The
Council addresses this issue quite often. The regular
holding of debates on the role of women in the area of
peace and security is proof that we are on the right path
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
by 2030.

It is unfortunate to see that women and girls are the
primary victims of violent conflicts around the world.
Women pay a high price in such conflicts as a result of
the fact that State representatives, Governments and the
parties to conflict do not respect international law. That
is why we must continue to consider the role women
play in order to prevent such situations. We also need a
long-term strategy aimed at empowering women and at
putting an end to the human rights violations of which
women and girls are victims.

In that framework, it is important that we facilitate
women's access to transitional justice mechanisms,
which seek, in particular, to combat crimes that take
place in conflicts and in transitional situations. We
therefore also attach due importance and interest to
the role of women in combating radicalism, which
very often leads to terrorism. Women can contribute
to creating an atmosphere that is beneficial for fighting
such phenomena, in particular so as to protect children.

That is why Qatar has been undertaking initiatives
at the national and international levels aimed at
strengthening peace and security in our societies.
Furthermore, and within the framework of our policy
to achieve peace worldwide, we aim to contribute to an
international study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). That is part of the State of Qatar's efforts
to implement its national 2030 vision, which we seek
to do at the national, regional and international levels.
We are attempting to integrate work on the women and
peace and security agenda in all of our development
and humanitarian programmes. We are doing that
in a number of different regions around the world.
Moreover, the international community has time and
again hailed those efforts.

Women's participation in decision-making within
the United Nations is an extremely important element.
It allows us to implement resolution 1325 (2000), and
it is the reason why we pay particular attention to that
aspect. We are an active member ofthe Group of Friends
of Gender Equality within the United Nations, and we
support various programmes and activities aimed at
ensuring that an increasing number of women occupy
important posts within the United Nations.

I would therefore like to thank the Secretary-
General for his efforts to achieve gender equality
within the Organization and to end gender-based
violence - and to do so not only within the Organization
but worldwide. That is one of the flagship measures
of his administration, and I hope we will be able to
implement it by 2028.

Finally, the State of Qatar remains committed to
strengthening women's participation in international
peace and security. It supports the various measures to
promote an atmosphere that protects women and allows
them to contribute to conflict resolution and to post-
conflict efforts.

