Mr. Corman (Turkey): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for your kind words about
the Turkish presidency of the Council in September. I
congratulate you on your presidency this month and
wish you and the Ugandan mission all the best for the
month of October.

I would like to commend your presidency for
organizing this meeting. I would also like to express

our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
thorough and analytical reports on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and on
women's participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
Let me also thank Ambassador Wittig for his valuable
contribution and the active work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

I would like to briefly highlight some of the
important conclusions that we have drawn from those
reports.

First, we are glad to see that the interlinkages and
interactions among peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are now better appreciated. In that
regard, the report of the Secretary-General makes an
important contribution by laying down an integrated
strategic framework for peace operations, in which
these processes complement and mutually reinforce
each other from the very outset. That is also precisely
what the presidential statement (S/PRST/ZOlO/ 18)
adopted at the Security Council summit held on
23 September 2010 called for (see S/PV.6389), and we
believe that the United Nations is on the right track.

Secondly, the report of the Secretary-General
points to the numerous short-term challenges in the
immediate aftermath of conflicts and provides
guidance on how those challenges, if addressed in a
proper and timely way, could be turned into
opportunities to sustain peace. An important corollary
is that short-term peacebuilding efforts need to be
integrated into longer-term strategies.

In that regard, the Secretary-General's report
rightly makes a strong case for more effective United
Nations leadership on the ground, backed up by
effective strategic planning capabilities at United
Nations Headquarters. Thus, we welcome the steps
taken towards providing improved guidance and
support to field missions and also support the
Secretary-General's initiative to deploy integrated and
effective leadership teams in those field missions.

Thirdly, we also concur with the Secretary-
General that peacebuilding is primarily a national
responsibility and that the principal role of the
international community should be to support national
peacebuilding efforts. The emphasis of the Secretary-
General's report on nationally owned planning
processes and national capacity-building is therefore
well placed. Thus, we believe that the international
community should assist in building or rebuilding
national capacities in a sustainable way, instead of
simply substituting for those capacities. That will
prevent a culture of dependency from taking root in
those societies and provide credible transition and exit
strategies.

In that regard, while there is certain merit in
trying to generalize about the steps to be taken, we
should also not lose sight of the fact that every country
is unique. Local conditions, needs, opportunities and
limitations may differ considerably from one country
to another, which means that there is no single
blueprint for dealing with the challenges facing
peacebuilding activities across the board. Rather, the
strategic planning of peacebuilding activities should be
sufficiently flexible to take into account country-
specific capacities and other idiosyncrasies.

Fourthly, the diversity of challenges and
complexities associated with peacebuilding efforts
today suggests that we will continue to need the
support and contribution of a myriad of actors,
including international financial institutions, regional
and subregional organizations, civil society and the
private sector. Indeed, various actors, such as the
African Union, the European Union, NATO and the
World Bank, have become established players in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, and the United
Nations should support and make use of the capacities
of those organizations. Of course, coordination among
those stakeholders is also critical, and the role of the
United Nations in that regard is simply essential.

Related to that, we also support the efforts aimed
at strengthening the international civilian capacity to
be deployed in countries emerging from conflict. We
hope that the review process, which is presently under
way under the auspices of the Secretary-General, will
lead to a broadening and deepening of the pool of
civilian experts available for deployment in a
coordinated and coherent way.

Last but not least, we wish to underline the
importance of mainstreaming women's participation in
peacebuilding efforts and of increasing opportunities
for women to engage in decision-making and economic
recovery. In that context, we welcome the Secretary-
General's action plan for gender-responsive
peacebuilding, which aims to address women's post-
conflict needs and remove the constraints on their full
participation in peacebuilding processes.

The draft presidential statement before us today
contains important elements on all the issues I have
just touched upon, and we fully support it. However,
allow me to conclude by reiterating the Secretary-
General's call on all United Nations Member States to
play their part in the collective efforts, not only
through the commitment of resources, but also through
coherent, consistent and sustained participation in
peacebuilding activities. Longer-term commitment, an
integrated approach and capacity-building are indeed
the key words. For our part, Turkey will continue to be
guided by those key principles and will actively engage
in all peacebuilding efforts.

