Mrs. Gatto (Italy): Mr. President, allow me to begin
by thanking you for organizing today's open debate of
the Security Council and the speakers for their valuable
contributions.

Italy welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council today's of resolution 2122 (2013), on women
and peace and security, which is a further step towards
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union and wishes to
make the following remarks in its national capacity.

We appreciate the focus oftoday's debate-women's
rights must be an integral component of efforts to
rebuild justice and rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations. I wish to address three areas. First,
with regard to participation, we need to remove the
obstacles blocking women's access to justice, which
are often rooted in traditional and cultural attitudes,
increase the number of women in national and
international judiciary bodies and ensure that gender
awareness informs their decisions. Secondly, with
respect to protection, laws must be gender-sensitive,
including by upholding the right of women to own land
and by criminalizing sexual and gender-based violence;
there should be no amnesty for such crimes. Thirdly,
as to reparations, to be effective, they must have the
strength to prevent the recurrence of Violations and
eliminate the root causes of gender inequality.
While Governments have the primary responsibility
to steer such processes, the international community
and other actors can provide critical support. In the fight
against impunity for perpetrators of war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide, where women are
often the victims, the International Criminal Court has
a unique role in complementing the efforts of national
courts when these are unable to bring perpetrators to
justice. The United Nations also has a key role to play
in assistance and capacity-building. Former judges
and the specialized staff of United Nations ad hoc
tribunals are potentially resources, as is cooperation
with civil society organizations, in particular women-
led organizations.

In 2015, the Security Council will hold a high-
level meeting to review the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/525) includes strategic measures to accelerate
implementation, of which I would like to highlight three
recommendations: increasing women's participation in
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions,
especially at the middle i and senior-management
levels; reaching the target of 15 per cent spending for
post-conflict peacebuilding projects on gender equality
and women's empowerment; and systematically
addressing all elements of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
work of the Security Council.

Italy considers resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions to be key elements of its agenda
for international peace and security. We are currently
reviewing our national action plan with a view to
accelerating its implementation over the next three
years. Gender equality and women's empowerment
are mainstreamed into development cooperation
programmes. Specific projects on resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions are currently being
implemented in Afghanistan, Lebanon, Somalia and
Palestine. Italy supported the creation ofthe first centre
for women victims of violence in Bethlehem, Palestine.
In Libya, we are supporting the approval of a bill that
equates victims of sexual violence with victims of war.

To conclude, we have the tools to ensure that the
Vision enshrined in resolution 1325 (2000) becomes
reality. It is high time we use them to turn a new page
in the lives of many women and girls around the world.

