Mr. Tesch (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for allowing me the opportunity again to address
the Council under your presidency and, in particular, to
speak on behalf of the Australian delegation on this
very important topic. We also greatly appreciate the
personal introduction by the Secretary-General of his
report.

Two years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), no one can seriously question how central
gender issues are to preventing and resolving conflict
and to rebuilding communities after conflict. At a time
when too many resolutions and statements languish on
shelves, that is no small achievement. The study on
women, peace and security - a large measure of the
funding for which Australia was pleased to provide -
and the Secretary-General's report on the study
maintain the momentum of resolution 1325 (2000) and
are both to be welcomed.

The detailed information contained in those two
documents should leave us in no doubt that, if we are
serious about conflict resolution, we must be serious
about gender perspectives on conflict. Gender
perspectives are neither marginal nor optional; they
cannot and should not be an afterthought. Rather, new
patterns of conflict, and the fact that women and girls
are too often the chief victims of conflict, mean that
gender is central to much that this Council and United
Nations peacekeeping operations do.

The recommendations and the presentation of
facts in the study and the Secretary-General's report
speak for themselves. Together with the
complementary study produced under the auspices of
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), they provide us with a valuable and
sensible guide to how we can further implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and how we can ensure that
women's and girls' perspectives are systematically
incorporated into all of our efforts to preserve and
restore peace.

I would like to highlight two of the many
important observations of the studies. The first is that
pre-conflict inequities and disregard for women's rights
become worse during conflict. Indeed, such inequities,
and in particular the lack of empowerment and
participation on the part of women, reduce the capacity
of communities to avoid conflict. A clear focus on
empowering women before conflicts break out,
therefore, should be a key element of a strategy of
conflict prevention - which, after all, should be our
primary objective.

Secondly, we need to see women as important
contributors to peace and not simply as victims of
conflict. We must be diligent and creative in giving
women a role in peace processes. Here, the Council can
play an important leadership role, particularly in
designing its mandates and ensuring that the necessary
resources are made available to ensure the fulfilment of
those mandates. The experience of our region - the
Solomon Islands, Bougainville and East Timor - gives
ample testimony to the vital difference that women can
make to the course of a conflict. I shall not go into the
details of those regional experiences here, as they are
set out in the written text of my statement. They are
also discussed in the statement by the representative of
Fiji, who spoke on behalf of the Pacific Island Forum
group of countries.

I should say, however, that Australia's
development cooperation programme recognizes the
social and gender dimensions of conflict, and therefore
supports the goal of increasing women's participation
in decision-making and their access to and control over
resources. It is working to ensure that women play an
equal role in political structures and in community
decision-making.

In June this year Australia launched its peace,
conflict and development policy. The policy provides a
framework for improving the ability of our
development cooperation programme to address
conflict and instability. This means there will be a
greater emphasis on conflict prevention and peace-
building, alongside the aid programme's more
traditional missions of humanitarian relief and
reconstruction. Given the importance of ensuring the
active engagement of women in peace-building
processes, the development cooperation programme
will improve the integration of gender principles into
all aid responses.

In future, we will also support those elements of
society which work for the peaceful resolution of
disputes and grievances. The role that women can play
as peace-builders will be a particular focus, and we
look forward to continuing to contribute to this very
important issue.

