Mr. Rai (Nepal): The adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) was a watershed moment, which established
women and peace and security as an important security
agenda and clearly recognized the importance of
women's role in conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

Since then, some progress has been achieved both
on the part ofthe United Nations and of Member States.
Yet even today the world faces the deliberate exclusion
of women from different walks of life, and the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800) stated that
grim fact.

We need to do more to reverse that situation. It is
egregious that sexual exploitation and abuse are used
as a tactic of war to destroy the dignity of women,
confidence of families and fabric of society.

Let me share what Nepal has been doing to
implement resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

In 2011 Nepal adopted its first national action plan,
for five years. It was the first country in South Asia
and the second in Asia to do so. Nepal has recently
finalized a second such plan for three years, and we
are committed to adopting that second plan as early
as possible.

Nepal has its own unique experience of making and
building peace in a sustained manner, as it went from
armed conflict to peaceful transformation. Women
have played a significant role in our peace process, and
Nepal stands ready to share its experiences and lessons
learned through the constructive engagement of women
in conflict prevention and resolution, post-conflict
restructuring and rebuilding, all geared towards the
timely achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs).

Our Constitution was given a new trajectory by the

mandatory 33 per cent representation of women at the
federal, provincial and local levels. It guarantees the
empowerment of women in all walks of national life
and has created an independent and powerful National
Women's Commission to monitor and safeguard
the rights and interests of women in the country.
Nepal's Constitution requires that the President and
Vice-President of the country be of different genders or
communities; similarly, either the Speaker or the Deputy
Speaker of the Lower House and Chair or Vice-Chair of
the upper house must be a woman. To ensure women's
participation in Government machinery, 33 per cent of
positions under reservation in Government services,
including in the security forces, have been reserved
for women.

Nepal, as the fifth-largest troop-contributing
country, is committed to increasing the number of
female peacekeepers on the ground. As a responsible
Member State, we are committed to taking action in
that respect to fulfil our responsibility.

To conclude, peace cannotbe achieved and sustained
without the equal and effective participation of women
in the making, keeping and building of peace. Nepal
is committed to accelerating its journey to ensuring
women's effective participation in all walks of life
and will join hands with the international community
to make this twenty-first century world safer and
prosperous through women's dignified participation
in society.

