Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your friendly
country, Sir, for presiding over the Security Council
during the month December. We also thank you for
convening this important debate. We also welcome the
fact that His Excellency the President of the Government
of Spain presided over the meeting this morning. We
also welcome the Council's adoption of resolution 2331
(2016), which we co-sponsored.

Moreover, I would be remiss not to associate
myself with the statement to be delivered by the
representatative of Bahrain on behalf of the Group of
Friends United against Human Trafficking.

The reports presented include appalling statistics
on the spread of human trafficking. They also bear out
the causal relationship between conflict and the spread
of human trafficking. A look at the ongoing conflicts all
over the world and their abhorrent repercussions, leads
us to conclude that forced migration is fundamental
to those conflicts, which have pushed hundreds of
thousands of people to flee their homes in search of
greater security and a life of dignity. We have all seen
the painful images of those who have paid their lives
due to the exploitation of refugees by human traffickers.

While we highlight the important measures
undertaken by the international community to address
trafficking in persons, the real challenge facing us is
not limited to promoting frameworks and means to
combat the phenomenon. Instead, we should address
the root causes that have led to such exacerbation. We
are talking about protracted and new conflicts that have
pushed innocent civilians to seek safety and peace. They
are therefore prone to danger in their own countries,
which are suffering from poverty and conflict, or are in
situations of displacement or are seeking asylum or are
migrating to other countries in order to flee death and
destruction. Adding to the dangers associated with the
phenomenon of human trafficking is the use by terrorist
groups of young people who are recruited to carry out
terrorist operations.

While referring to the horrific repercussions of
conflicts and policies that violate the fundamental
rights of individuals and peoples, we would also like to
stress that conflict provides an environment conducive
to human trafficking. The international community has
failed to address those conflicts and crisis that indirectly
contribute to the further spread of this phenomenon.

The friendly people of Syria have paid a very high
price owing to the failure of the Security Council to
save civilians and reach a solution to the crisis in their
country, which is now in its sixth year. The appalling
and unprecedented humanitarian crisis in Syria has
unfortunately been exacerbated in Aleppo, where
an increasing number of civilians find themselves in
situations of forced migration. The many security and
other repercussions of this situation will have an impact
on regional and international peace and security.

Furthermore, we would like to stress that, should the
international community should succeed in putting an
end to human trafficking, we would still need to address
the root causes and find just solutions to conflicts and
crisis, fight impunity and ensure accountability.

The State of Qatar has supported the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
since its inception. We have enacted many legislative
measures aimed at combating trafficking in persons. We
have also cooperated internationally and promulgated
laws that criminalize the human-trafficking
phenomenon. In 2015, we hosted the thirteenth United

Nations Conference on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice. The Doha communique that was issued
following the Conference endorsed a comprehensive
approach to combating the crime of human trafficking.
We are also one of the major supporters of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which is the
primary United Nations agency operating in this field.
In same vein, we have been one of the main contributors
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Victims of Human
Trafficking since its establishment.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar will spare no effort
to support the efforts of the Security Council to put an
end to the phenomenon of human trafficking and to all
conflicts and crises and bring about peace and security
in our region and the world at large.

