Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): Mr. President, I would like, on behalf of the
delegation of Burkina Faso, to congratulate you
warmly on assuming the presidency of the Council and
to assure your delegation of our full support. We also
take this opportunity to congratulate the delegation of
the United States of America on its very fruitful
presidency in September.

We are most grateful to you, Sir, for having
convened today's debate and thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her presentation of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/465), as well as all
the briefers for their important contributions and their
commitment to women.

Nine years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) and one year after the adoption of 1820 (2008),
and despite the Security Council's repeated
recommendations and appeals, post-conflict situations
regrettably remain marked by the ongoing devastating
impact of armed conflict on women and children.

Sexual violence and recurrent violations of
women's rights are genuine sources of concern, given
their deep physical, psychological and economic
impact on victims and their respective communities.
The emergence of extremist groups in a number of
areas and the adoption of legislation legitimizing
discriminatory practices restrict women's full
enjoyment of their rights. Refugee camps and camps
for internally displaced persons, where they exist,
sometimes become zones of insecurity for women,
instead of serving as the islands of relative tranquility
they are supposed to be. We cannot deny that women's
and girls' access to access health services and
education is weak, or ignore the difficulties they
experience in seeking to benefit from judicial
mechanisms, all of which favour the entrenchment of
impunity. Furthermore, women's participation in the
negotiation of peace agreements remains weak, thus
preventing their specific needs from being taken
adequately into account.

Peacebuilding is first and foremost a
responsibility and a challenge that fall to States. In
countries emerging from conflict situations, priorities
are numerous and all are urgent. In such a context, the
situation of women and girls must be an absolute
priority. We must first ensure the establishment of an
adequate legislative, regulatory and judicial framework
for addressing the violation of women's rights and the
fight against impunity, while restoring and making
accessible health services and psychological care.
Awareness-raising and the training of parties regarding
their obligations, as well as the creation of special
community programmes, will help to overcome socio-
cultural inertia and other obstacles to the empowerment
of women. The systematic inclusion of the gender issue
in security sector and justice reform is also a necessity.

Thus, ceasefire and peace agreements, as well as
disarmament, demobilization and reinsertion
programmes, must fully incorporate the specific needs
of women and girls. Who better than women
themselves to plead this cause? We must therefore
guarantee their effective participation in all stages of
the peace process. To that end and to enable them,
where appropriate, to have the necessary tools at hand,
peacetime national policies must incorporate the
training of women in negotiation and mediation
techniques and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

In the long term and given the reality of the
growing feminization of poverty and social and
economic inequality, there is a need to provide greater
opportunities in the education of girls, livelihood
training and job creation for women, including former
combatants. Overall, States must take ownership of the
concept of women and peace and security. The
adoption of action plans towards the improved
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national level is crucial in that respect.

Most important, however, is the fact that
Governments will have to do their utmost to strengthen
the rule of law and establish institutions conducive to

creating a climate of trust between leaders, all actors,
victims and the population as a whole, with the
ultimate objective of eliminating the deep-rooted
causes of conflict.

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
a collective endeavour. Along with States, the
international community, including the United Nations,
has an important and unique role to play in that regard.
Every agency of the system should play its part in the
context of a common and consistent approach. The
United Nations must continue to work to strengthen
cooperation with regional, subregional and national
organizations, including civil society and other local
actors. The Security Council must continue to ensure
that the specific needs of women and girls are taken
into account in its peacekeeping mandates and in the
effective implementation of its relevant resolutions and
statements.

As to the specific issue of sexual violence, my
delegation welcomes the recent adoptions of
resolutions 1882 (2009) and 1888 (2009), which
provide for the strengthened implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). The Council
should continue to call for increased female
participation in contingents, for the appointment of
more women as mediators, special envoys and special
representatives, and for the inclusion in reports of more
information on the particular needs of women and girls
in post-conflict situations. We cherish the hope that the
establishment of the composite gender entity by the
General Assembly will add momentum to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). None these
actions, however, will be viable if they are not backed
by human capacity-building and adequate financing.

The commemoration of the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) should offer us
all an opportunity to reiterate our firm commitment and
genuine political will to contribute to the emancipation
of women in general and the effective liberation
of those who, often the innocent victims of conflict,
must also endure the harsh conditions of personal
rehabilitation and national reconciliation.

