Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to begin
by commending the presidency of Uganda for
convening this thematic debate to give the Council and
Member States an opportunity to have a broad
exchange of views and proposals on such an important
issue.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union.

Today's debate presents yet another important
opportunity to promote the effective, coherent and
systematic implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
which gave much-needed and welcome visibility to the
question of women's empowerment, their role as
peacebuilders and their vulnerable position as victims
of war.

As a non-permanent member of the Council in
2000, Ukraine was one of the 15 countries that voted
for resolution 1325 (2000). That decision by the
Council has been a milestone document on the
empowerment of women. We welcome the latest report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
resolution (S/2010/498) and support its
recommendations. Ukraine welcomes the development
of a set of indicators for use at the global level to track
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We urge
Member States to begin to use the proposed indicators
for which data already exist.

We believe that the empowerment of women is
important for the realization of the human rights of
women, as well as for economic and political
development. It is equally important for durable peace,
security, early recovery and reconciliation.

Ukraine stands fully committed to the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009). However, there must be a
coherent strategy to cover all aspects of the protection
of women and women's rights. In that regard, Ukraine
welcomes the establishment of the United Nations
composite entity, UN Women. We hope it will bring
about much-needed improvements in the work of the
United Nations on gender equality, including in the
area of international peace and security.
Despite all international efforts, women continue
to be the most vulnerable victims of armed conflict and
to be targeted with the most brutal forms of sexual
violence. In addition to that, women also experience
the trauma of losing relatives and friends in armed
conflict, as well as having to take responsibility for the
care of surviving family members. They also constitute
the majority of refugees and displaced persons. My
country is greatly concerned about that situation and
strongly condemns the targeting of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. We welcome Security
Council efforts to pay special attention to the particular
needs of women affected by armed conflict when
considering action aimed at promoting peace and
security.

We believe that the Security Council has a special
responsibility to support women's participation in
peace processes by ensuring a gender balance in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We welcome the fact
that the Council has already recognized the important
role of women in conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

In line with the position of the European Union,
Ukraine considers gender equality, gender
mainstreaming and the empowerment of women not
only as important objectives but also as the means to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals and as an
essential part of the development agenda.

As an active participant in United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, Ukraine has for years contributed
women civilian police and military observers to the
Organization's peacekeeping missions. We believe that
the presence of women in United Nations missions can
foster confidence and trust among local populations,
which are critical elements in any peacekeeping
mission. In performing their tasks, women are perceived
to be compassionate, unwilling to opt for force over
reconciliation and ready to listen and learn. They are
also widely seen as contributors to an environment of
stability and morality that fosters the progress of peace.

At the same time, women are still
underrepresented in decision-making with regard to
conflict resolution. Their initiatives and visions for
peace and security are rarely heard during peace
negotiations. In that regard, I would like to stress that
the international community should use the potential of
women as agents of preventive diplomacy,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
In conclusion, Ukraine reiterates its readiness to
continue to work constructively with other Member
States in order to ensure the protection of women in
armed conflict and women's participation in peace
processes.
