Ms. Wilson (Australia): As we have heard today,
the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/861) is clear. We
have made progress on policy and normative change.
But we need to further mainstream gender equality and
ensure the effective implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. We must move from ad-
hoc programmes and words on paper to ensuring that
women are included in all aspects of this agenda as a
matter of course.

That is possible. Australia commends the United
Nations Peacebuilding Fund for exceeding its target,
with 20 per cent of funding focused on promoting
women's participation in peacebuilding. That shows the
positive outcomes that can be achieved by focusing on
implementation, setting clear targets and investing in
dedicated gender expertise. Australia is pleased that our
$10 million commitment to the Fund is helping countries
build sustainable peace. We have also increased the
number of our women officers serving as staff officers
and military observers in United Nations missions to
25 per cent, exceeding the commitment made at the
2016 Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference.

Australia commends the Department of Political
Affairs for its oversight of dedicated efforts across
a range of special political missions in 2016, which
resulted in a substantial increase in the deployment
of gender expertise, with 25 gender advisers working
across 11 field missions. Australia is pleased to have
helped with that expansion by providing the first-ever
military gender adviser to the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. We have also seconded a senior military
officer to UN-Women here in New York as a technical
expert on women and peace and security. That officer is
assisting in the conduct of the female military officers'
course and helping UN-Women country teams as they
work to increase gender equality in local armed forces.

Such efforts demonstrate that with dedicated
funding and specific targets, we can improve women's
participation, but all key actors must play a role in
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda. We must also acknowledge the expertise and
enduring capability of civil society. Civil-society
groups often predate conflicts and will carry on
after them, and civil society is our greatest source of
expertise on the ground. That is why Australia is also
pleased to be the founding - and largest - supporter
of the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund, which
supports civil-society organizations in contributing to
conflict prevention, crisis response and peacebuilding.

To sustain peace we must include women, not just
in our words but in our actions. We must all accelerate
and strengthen practical efforts to place women front
and centre in the peace and security agenda.

