Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to start by
commending the United States presidency for having
convened this open debate of the Security Council on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is
important to proceed along the road paved by that
resolution and to prove in practice that it remains an
action-oriented, results-producing document.

The issue before us is as important as it is
complex. One could approach it from various angles
yet still leave many of its important aspects untouched.
As a country that not so long ago was exposed to
armed aggression and went through the horrors of war,
Croatia has gained valuable knowledge about some
aspects of the field we are debating today. Let me
briefly share with the Council some of Croatia's
experiences and achievements in that regard.

The Government's Commission for Gender
Equality - an intergovernmental Commission
entrusted with the creation of policies and the
coordination of all activities for the promotion of
gender equality at the local, national and regional
levels - incorporated a chapter on women and armed
conflict in the National Policy for the Promotion of
Gender Equality for the period 2001-2005 and its
implementation programme. Both documents were
adopted by the Croatian Parliament.

The following activities have been envisaged for
implementation by 2005. The Commission for Gender
Equality, in cooperation with other relevant institutions
and organizations, especially non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), will inform women, on an
ongoing basis, about the work of the International
Criminal Court and the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. It will educate women and
children about landmines and other types of explosive
devices; secure appropriate assistance for displaced
persons, refugees and victims of the Homeland War;
and participate in the implementation of measures
aimed at simplifying their return and reintegration into
society.

The Commission is also entrusted with the task of
promoting the participation of women in activities
associated with the maintenance of peace at all levels;
enhancing knowledge of humanitarian law and human
rights; and enabling greater representation of women in
bodies dealing with security issues and the defence
policy of the Republic of Croatia.

Some tangible results have already been achieved
in pursuit of the goals set in the National Policy. I am
pleased to inform the Council of the following facts.

Through the Defence Act, adopted in 2002, the
Committee for Gender Equality was established within
the Ministry of Defence. Today, in the Croatian
Ministry of Defence and in the Croatian armed forces,
women constitute about 15 per cent of the workforce.
That includes the Minister of Defence herself, as well
as one of the Assistant Ministers and the Secretary of
the Ministry.

As an integral part of the modernization of
military education and training for the armed forces,
the subjects of international humanitarian law and
human rights are now included in the school
curriculums of the Croatian Military Academy. In the
teaching of those subjects, special emphasis will be
placed on the promotion and protection of women's
human rights and on the introduction of measures
aimed at combating violence against women in war, in
armed conflict and during post-conflict transitions.

In July 2003 the Parliament of Croatia adopted
the Law on Gender Equality, which, inter alia,
stipulates that all State administration bodies and
corporate entities with public competences have an
obligation to apply special temporary measures and
adopt action plans for the promotion of gender equality,
thus introducing the principle of gender mainstreaming
into Croatian legislation.

With respect to Croatia's participation in
peacekeeping missions, not only do we support the
incorporation of a gender perspective into
peacekeeping field operations, but we also implement
that rule ourselves. Croatia contributed four female
officers to the German contingent of the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. In addition, I
should like to draw the Council's attention to the fact
that a Croatian army captain is the first female army
officer to take part in the Military Observer Group in
India and Pakistan.

Non-governmental organizations in Croatia are
playing an active role in the promotion of the role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in peace- building. They are carrying out various
projects, ranging from awareness-raising and capacity-
building activities aimed at increasing the
representation of women at all decision-making levels,
to specific activities in which NGOs assist women in
multi-ethnic areas and areas heavily damaged by armed
activities. For the post-war confidence-building process
to be successful, it is essential to include women as
active participants in post-conflict reintegration and
reconstruction. Croatia has gained a great deal of
experience in this area, and we stand ready to share it
with others.

The issue of the protection of women in armed
conflict and their fundamental role in conflict
prevention and peace-building cannot be considered
without taking into account the fact that they are
among those most affected by the violence and
economic instability brought upon society by armed
conflict. Yet when it comes to negotiating peace, post-
war reconstruction and reconciliation, women are still
grossly under-represented. Therefore, we need to
enhance the role of the main bodies of the United
Nations so that they can streamline their efforts
towards the empowerment of women.

Strengthening the participation of women in the
work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Development Fund for Women could make a
real difference on the ground. Post-conflict transition,
recovery and reconstruction cannot be achieved if
gender equality and the promotion of women's rights
are absent. Croatia welcomes the increased
involvement of women in peacekeeping operations,
especially among human rights and humanitarian
personnel, military observers and civilian police.

Along those lines, we strongly encourage the
practice of mainstreaming a gender perspective into
peacekeeping operations. At the same time, we must
strengthen our efforts to improve protection for women
in armed conflict, in parallel with the enhancement of
their contribution to peace processes and rebuilding
their communities. As the Secretary-General has stated
"Sustainable peace will not be achieved without the
full and equal participation of women and men".
(S/2002/IZ54, para. 68)

Let me conclude by saying that, although much
has been done, we still witness continuous violence
against women during conflict, women who are forced
to flee their homes for that reason, lack of health care
and the accelerated spread of infections such as
HIV/AIDS in conflict and post-conflict settings. It goes
without saying that we need to do more at the
international, regional and national levels. Our
deliberations here today and constructive ideas are our
joint efforts in that direction. It is encouraging to see
the Security Council engaged in this debate. I take this
opportunity to commend once again the effort to
convene and successfully organize this meeting.

