Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Madam President, for having organized this
important and timely debate. Allow me also to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing, and
Ms. Bachelet, Ambassador Kapambwe and Ms. Nemat
for their presentations.

More than a decade has passed since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). Throughout that period, the
United Nations system, regional organizations,
Member States and civil society have made significant
efforts to adapt the resolution to local settings through
a wide spectrum of measures and initiatives. Progress
has been made in terms of discourse and evolving
practice on the participation of women in conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding, and
awareness has increased of the threat that sexual
violence constitutes to peace and security.

Despite important national, regional and
international efforts, however, the conditions that
women and girls still face in situations of armed
conflict continue to be abhorrent. The benefits of
resolution 1325 (2000) have yet to reach most women
in conflict and in fragile settings. In that regard, allow
me to make the following comments.

First, we view the prevention of conflict as a
crucial element of resolution 1325 (2000). That
includes the prevention of all forms of conflict-related
violence against women and girls. Sexual violence
remains the least-condemned war crime in peace
agreements and beyond. The elimination of impunity is
perhaps the single most effective preventive tool to
fight that crime. In that regard, reforming the security
sector and ensuring respect for the rule of law in a
gender-responsive manner is of crucial importance.
Conflict and post-conflict societies should be assisted
in those areas as early as possible.

The preventive aspect of resolution 1325 (2000)
also includes women's full and equal involvement in
conflict prevention efforts. We concur with the
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/598*) that more
attention needs to be paid to women's roles in the field.
We support his recommendation for the Council to use
its deliberations on preventive diplomacy and
mediation to consider means of enhancing the role of
women in conflict prevention.

Secondly, the meaningful participation of women
in decision-making forums, institutions and
mechanisms related to conflict resolution and
peacebuilding is essential, not only for peace but also
for sustainable development and long-term security.
Such participation should be treated as a requirement
for building a solid and genuine democracy, which
cannot be fully achieved unless the inequalities
affecting half of the population are adequately
addressed.

In that sense, the political participation of women
and addressing their specific needs are not solely social
issues, but also good governance issues. In particular,
women's engagement in peace negotiations is essential
to ensure that their rights and needs are taken into
account in peace agreements and institutional
arrangements. Peace accord provisions could have far-
reaching consequences on women's engagement in
post-conflict governance and on their access to justice,
reparations, resources and economic security.

International, regional and national actors should
therefore spare no efforts to engage women and to
ensure the inclusion of gender expertise in peace
efforts. It is also essential that regular consultations
between special envoys and mediators and women's
civil society groups become standard operating
procedure.

Partnerships with male community leaders and
opinion-shapers could also play an important role in
raising awareness of the benefits of women's
participation and could help to implement gender-
related programming at the local level.

Thirdly, we would like to stress the importance of
investing in youth, girls and boys alike, as an essential
driving force behind meaningful peacebuilding efforts.
Arab youth have lately become the symbol of an
uprising in the name of freedom, dignity and
participation. In their legitimate struggle for a better
life, Arab youth groups have exhibited immense
creativity. The ideals of young people are their most
valuable resource for influencing the development of
their societies and the shape of their future. This has
been embodied by Ms. Tawakkul Karman, the first
Arab woman to become a Nobel Prize laureate, along
with two great women leaders from Liberia.

Finally, it is our collective and individual
responsibility as Member States to adopt a determined
and consistent approach that will lead to positive and
concrete results in the lives of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations. The framework and the tools
are at hand; let us back them with the necessary
political will.

