Ms. Pires (Timor-Leste): My delegation
congratulates the Russian Federation for having
convened this annual open debate on women and peace
and security: implementing the common agenda.

We wish also to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
(S/2016/822), the Executive Director of UN-Women for
her comprehensive and informative remarks, and the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for its contribution.

Important steps have been taken to further
implement the women and peace and security agenda
since the last debate on this issue (see S/PV.7704),
including increased gender provisions in signed peace
agreements. While we are encouraged by these good
practices, including those that were part of the process
leading to the Colombia peace accord, and commend
the Secretary-General and the United Nations system
on the important steps taken to press for, facilitate and
support the inclusion of women in peace negotiations,
we cannot be complacent with respect to the progress
made but must continue in our resolve towards the full
implementation of the agenda.

When we look at the world's trouble spots, we
can see that women and children continue to suffer
disproportionately in times of conflict and in post-
conflict situations. The peace and security challenges
have not lessened and in some cases have been
exacerbated and have grown in complexity, bringing
great suffering to those affected, in particular women
and children.

Violence against women and children, including
sexual violence, is devastating and has life-long effects.
It must be strongly condemned and those responsible
held accountable so as to break the continuum of
violence. This, of course, includes any cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse perpetrated by some United
Nations peacekeepers. Funds are needed to also ensure
that survivors can be supported in beginning the
difficult task of dealing with their experiences and
reconstructing their lives.

Timor-Leste is fully committed to the empowerment
and the advancement of women and gender equality.
Earlier this year, on 26 April, the Council of Ministers
adopted a five-year national action plan on women and
peace and security. During its recent launch, our Prime
Minister highlighted the need for women to actively
participate in decision-making and expressed the hope
that the plan would increase the participation of women,
working together with men for the development of
the country.

Timor-Leste's national action plan is the product
of a comprehensive and inclusive process and sets
out the actions to be taken with respect to four key
pillars, namely, participation, prevention, protection
and peacebuilding. The plan promotes and guarantees
women's participation in all decision-making positions
and processes, including in the defence and security
sectors, peacebuilding and development. It proposes
concrete actions to review and change laws, policies
and programmes aimed at the promotion of women and
girls' right to a life in peace and security, and at ensuring
their equal and active participation and leadership in
peacebuilding, State-building and development.

The implementation of the plan will involve a
whole-of-Government approach as well as civil-society
organizations, and accountability will be ensured
through a monitoring committee that will be made
up of Members of Parliament and non-governmental
organizations. We are grateful to UN-Women for all of
its support in the process to date.

We are confident that as Timorese women participate
in and benefit from such activities, our society will
be more inclusive, our people will be empowered to
participate in and contribute to development, and
Timor-Leste will ultimately become stronger.

We have today, through our national action
plans on resolution 1325 (2000); the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development; the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women and its
general recommendation No. 30, on women in conflict
prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations; and the
recommendations of the three reviews that took place
last year, a comprehensive framework on furthering the
women and peace and security agenda.

We are confident that with political will, we all can
continue to strive to move forward.

