Ms. Fata (Holy See): The Holy See thanks the
French presidency for convening this important
open debate.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) represented
and continues to represent an important step in ensuring
that women play their rightful role and have their voices
heard in the areas of peace and security. While many
positive steps have been taken to implement the eight
Council resolutions on women and peace and security,
women remain a small minority in peace and security
mediation efforts and in peacebuilding operations. This
open debate should serve to highlight that fact and find
new ways to advance the implementation of the Council
resolutions on the subject.

The experience of the Catholic Church in
conflict prevention and resolution, peacemaking and
peacebuilding at the grassroots level during the more
than five decades of violent conflict in Colombia and
today in the implementation of the peace accord on
the ground has amply demonstrated that women have
been, and are, key peacemakers. They disarm the
violent with their multiple capacities to comprehend
and empathize, dissuade, convince and forgive and
rebuild lives, families and entire communities. Pastora
Mira Garcia, who lost her father, husband and two
children during the civil war, is an icon for women
peacemakers. She represented and spoke for all the
victims in Colombia's 52-year armed conflict during
the meeting on 8 September with Pope Francis and the
victims of the conflict in Villavicencio. She teaches us
that forgiveness is the balm of healing.

Sadly, however, most of today's conflicts show
that women are all too often targets and victims, rather
than peacemakers and peacebuilders. Women and girls
suffer the impact of violent conflicts disproportionately.
The most heinous aspect of such violence is the fact
that they are specifically targeted as objects of violence
and abuse, as a strategy of war. They are treated as
pawns of war, rather than instruments of peace. Violent
extremists and terrorists have used, and continue to
use, sexual violence as a terror tactic. Acts of violence
against women and girls are perpetuated not only in
conflict situations. Women and girls also constitute, for
instance, the great majority of the victims of trafficking
in persons.

The States Members of the United Nations have a
fundamental responsibility to prosecute the perpetrators
of human rights abuses, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, including those related to sexual
violence against women and girls. Parties to conflict
should respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

Access to education in crisis situations is vital for
the empowerment of women and girls. Through its
institutions and agencies around the world, the Catholic
Church provides assistance and support, education
and skills training to thousands of women and girls
who are the survivors of sexual violence in conflict
situations. The courageous men and women who run
those institutions sacrifice themselves daily, and
many of them have paid dearly for their endeavours.
Locally rooted, those institutions are able to respond
rapidly and effectively so as to address on the ground
the consequences of violence in armed conflict.
Internationally networked, they are active advocates in
national and international forums, where policies are
shaped and decisions are taken.

The Holy See and the Catholic Church will
continue to engage women in their efforts aimed at
conflict prevention and resolution, peacemaking and
peacebuilding in many parts of the world, not only as a
matter ofprinciple, but also because the lessons learned
and best practices verified in those fields clearly
show that women are, indeed, effective agents for the
achievement and maintenance of peace and security
for all.

