Ms. Bah Kuhnke (Sweden): I align myself with the
statements to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union, the Nordic countries and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security.

Let me begin by thanking the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Pramila
Patten, for their thoughtful interventions this morning
and for their leadership and concrete efforts to combat
conflict-related sexual violence. I want to extend a
particular word of welcome and thanks to Ms. Razia
Sultana, whose testimony underlines the critical
importance of using all the tools available to the
Security Council to prevent and respond to conflict-
related sexual violence.

In my position as the Swedish Minister for
Culture and Democracy - with responsibilities such
as national human rights, civil society and the fight
against discrimination and racism - I have met women
and girls, men and boys who are seeking asylum in
Sweden, and I have listened to their testimonies. I
have heard stories about children in conflict areas,
taken from their families, abducted, forced into sexual
slavery. Those are horrible atrocities. But it does not
stop there. During their journey to Europe, they were
once again abused and harassed, including in refugee
camps. My role as Minister is to listen, to understand
and - most important - to act. Those testimonies,
like Ms. Sultana's, cannot only be something we here
are horrified by; the stories must become the starting
point for action.

Regrettably, violence, oppression and systematic
subordination still mark the daily lives of countless
women and girls. Conflict-related sexual violence
brutalizes and traumatizes the victims and seeks to
undermine and shatter communities and societies.
Its impact cannot be overestimated. Addressing this
scourge is a central part of the Security Council's work.
Alarmingly, conflict-related sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism has reached new levels. That is
a core security challenge. At the heart of this issue is
the fundamental principle of women's full enjoyment
of human rights, especially sexual and reproductive
health and rights. The link between accountability and
prevention is clear. Ensuring accountability and putting
an end to impunity for violations and abuses against
international law must be a priority for all of us, both
inside and outside the Council.

When Sweden joined the Security Council, we
set out two overarching priorities: conflict prevention
and women and peace and security. Therefore, we
thank Peru for organizing this open debate, and
welcome the focus of today's discussion. Since 2014,
Sweden has pursued a feminist foreign policy based
on four R's - rights, representation, resources and
reality check. That means that throughout our foreign
policy 4 including peace, security, trade, humanitarian
and development efforts - we are applying a systematic
gender perspective. Without inclusion and respect for
all, sustainable peace can never be achieved. We know
that gender equality makes societies more peaceful.
The ongoing Stockholm Forum on Gender Equality
will cover many of these critical issues and seek
common solutions.

The Council needs to address the gender dynamics
of the root causes of conflict. We must consider
structural gender inequality as a critical element of the
instability that hinders efforts to maintain or restore
international peace and security. To achieve that, we
need gendered conflict analysis, while building on
gender-disaggregated data and solid gender expertise.
We also need to build alliances with brave civil
society actors, who play an essential role in addressing
conflict-related sexual violence and promoting gender
equality. We fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Council consider the early
warning signs of sexual violence in its monitoring of
conflict situations.

Last year, the Security Council added the first-ever
separate designation criteria on conflict-related sexual
violence in the sanctions regime for the Central African
Republic. However, having the criteria is not enough;
sanctions committees also need gender expertise. This
year, when the Council renewed the sanctions regime
for the Central African Republic, it added language to

respond to this need. Let us work together to include
similar criteria in all relevant sanctions regimes.

Panels of experts must also be mandated to report
to the sanctions committees on conflict-related sexual
violence. In cases where there are still no separate
designation criteria, we encourage the panels to report
under international humanitarian law and/or human
rights criteria. To further inform country-specific
considerations, we encourage Council members and the
broader membership to make full use of the documents
and the meetings of the Security Council Informal
Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security.

The importance of women in peacekeeping no
longer needs to be justified. The evidence speaks
for itself. With more female peacekeepers and police
officers, we can achieve more and reach the whole
population in a conflict area. Sweden is actively
addressing factors that hinder the deployment of women
peacekeepers, police and corrections officers. The
women and peace and security agenda is an integral
part of predeployment training for all Swedish troops,
and all deployed contingents have specially trained
gender advisers. There are many good examples to be
shared in that regard.

We welcome the enhanced focus on access to
justice and its links to prevention, which contributes
to ending impunity and to ensuring victims' trust in
accountable and effective criminal-justice institutions.
As the report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2018/250 highlights, the effects of sexual
violence - including trauma, stigma, poverty and poor
health - can echo across generations. In response, we
need to ensure socioeconomic-reintegration support to
restore community cohesion. Survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence also must have access to the full
range of livelihood, legal, psychosocial and medical
services, including sexual- and reproductive-health
services that are not subject to donor restrictions.

The focus of today's open debate shows that it is
a broad agenda with many interconnected goals and
that no single actor can achieve them alone. That makes
alliances ~ among States, regional and international
organizations, civil society, women's organizations,
inter alia - so important. We, the Security Council,
need to show leadership - not just with regard to
today's topic, but across all aspects of our work.

