Ms. Bavdai Kuret (Slovenia): I would like to
thank Peru for organizing this important debate, and
the speakers for their briefings.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Mali, the latter on behalf of the
Human Security Network. I would like to make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.

Slovenia welcomes the report on conflict-related
sexual violence submitted by the Secretary-General
(S/2018/250) and shares deep concern with regard to
its findings. We join others in condemning the grave
violations committed against women and girls, men
and boys in conflict situations. As the report once
again demonstrates, sexual violence in contemporary
conflicts is not a side effect but rather a front-line
consideration and a horrifying tactic of war. All
perpetrators should be held accountable. It is of the
utmost importance to prevent the trend of continuous
sexual violence by fighting impunity. In that regard,
the role of international criminal justice has been
recognized, in particular that of the International
Criminal Court.

At the same time, we recall that the primary
responsibility to protect civilians and bring perpetrators
to justice rests with States. The international
community must therefore assist States in addressing
all these issues, such as when it comes to investigating
and prosecuting perpetrators, including United Nations
and other peacekeeping personnel.

Although the victims of sexual violence are
predominantly women and girls, we should not forget
that sexual violence is also committed against boys and
men, particularly in detention. Much has already been
done when it comes to assistance for victims, but as
long as we are faced with tragic stories we must not
stop doing everything humanly possible to alleviate
their suffering.

Conflict-related sexual violence is not only a
humanitarian or human rights issue, but a security
issue as well. It impedes women in particular from
participating in peace and political processes and
in post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation.
Preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual
violence are important elements in efforts to empower
women and achieve gender equality. Sexual and
gender-based violence presents a barrier to women's
participation, not only in peace-related and post-
conflict activities but also in everyday life.

Slovenia is addressing the correlation between
conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence in
two draft strategic documents to be adopted this year.
The new action plan on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and security
for the period 2018-2020 addresses conflict-related
sexual violence with activities devoted to accountability,
education and training. Violence against women,
including sexual violence, alongside areas dedicated to
empowering women, will also form part of guidelines
on gender equality in development cooperation.

At the national level, important achievements have
also been reached in education and training on women
and peace and security, which were systematically
introduced throughout the Slovenian armed forces.
In 2015, a permanent position for a gender adviser in
the General Staff of the Slovenian armed forces was
established, as was a network of gender advisers. We
are proud that those efforts have shown concrete results
and have also been recognized internationally, with
Slovenia ranking fourth in the world on the Women,
Peace and Security Index.

However, there is no time to rest. We will continue
to support United Nations action against conflict-
related sexual violence. Accordingly, we have joined the
Secretary-General's voluntary compact on preventing
and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse as part
of the overall zero-tolerance policy, which Slovenia
strongly supports.

