Mr. Inguanez (Malta): First and foremost, I would
like to thank the Bolivian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today's open debate on women
and peace and security, and for giving due importance
to this dimension of peace and security. We are pleased
to participate at this important debate today and look
forward to continue engaging with the international
community on this issue. I would also like to thank
the Executive Director of UN-Women and Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah for sharing their insights and experience
with us today.

Malta aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to present a few additional remarks in my
national capacity.

We are pleased that women's empowerment, gender
equality and women's participation in public and
political life is increasingly taking centre stage in the
work of the Security Council. We consider resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent related resolutions
central to the Council's work in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Clearly, in achieving
peace and security, we cannot ignore half of our
population. Women should be central participants in
society. They should be able to participate freely in
local and international debates about their futures. They
should be able to hold public office. And they should be
able to become decision-makers in Governments and
society. Women should also be allowed unhindered
participation in discussions and debates outside of their
home countries. As the Secretary-General states in his
report, women have an equal right to participate in all
efforts to prevent and resolve conflict (S/2018/900).

In an overwhelming number of cases, women suffer
direct and deliberate violence in conflict zones. The
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) recognized sexual
violence as a weapon of war. The March 2018 report
of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2018/250) presents all of us with a sobering
read. The report also makes it clear that much more is
required to combat the gender-based violence that is
ravaging generations of women and girls.

We take careful note of the Secretary-General's
concern as outlined in October's report about the lack
of progress across the most fundamental commitments
to peace and security, human rights and gender
equality. We agree that sustainable approaches to the
challenges highlighted throughout the present report
will require our creativity and long-term commitment
to move beyond one-off project-based approaches to
women and peace and security to achieve system-level
and structural changes.

Gender equality is a priority. Sustainable
Development Goal 5, as outlined in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, should be one of the
main overarching principles for all States Members
of the United Nations in the field of gender equality
and women's empowerment. Over the past years, Malta
has taken renewed steps to enhance gender equality. A
new law against gender-based violence and domestic
violence was enacted this year that incorporates the
provisions of the Istanbul Convention. Furthermore,
a focal point on women and peace and security was
appointed within our Ministry for Foreign Affairs and
Trade Promotion.

Malta welcomes the Secretary-General's plan
to enhance women's participation at all levels. It
is important for the United Nations to be seen as an
example of an international organization actively
recruiting and promoting women to high-level posts.
Women and girls need examples to emulate and on
which to chart their future career paths. Demonstrating
actively that women in decision-making roles are the
norm and not the exception will be an important legacy
of the United Nations for generations to come.

