Ms. Onubogu: I would like to congratulate the
delegation of Romania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I should also like to
express our gratitude for the holding of this meeting and
for the opportunity to address the Council. I would also
like to extend to the Council the greetings of to The Right
Honourable Don McKinnon, Commonwealth Secretary-
General.

Since 2000, the Commonwealth has been
working with member countries to implement the
historic resolution 1235 (2000), particularly by
strengthening its programme of work on gender,
democracy, peace and conflict through the
Commonwealth's new Plan of Action for Gender
Equality 2005-2015.

The Commonwealth's 53 member States straddle
nearly every continent in seeking to promote peace,
strong democracies, good governance, gender equality
and sustainable development. Within those
fundamental values, the Commonwealth's comparative
advantage lies in upholding democracy and developing
and encouraging a stronger democratic culture within
member countries, as evidence has shown that
countries with strong democracies are less likely to
experience conflict. In that connection, Mr. McKinnon
has noted that

"when women and men are enabled to play their
full part in the future of their country, when there is
real debate about issues of collective concern -
about education, health care, employment,
governance, social justice - extremist and violent
ideologies are less likely to hold sway".

Broadly speaking, the Commonwealth has a five-
pronged approach to conflict prevention, conflict
management and peacebuilding. It includes the
following elements.

The first relates to strengthening democracies.
The Commonwealth works with member States to
build the necessary capacity for democratic elections
and governance systems and to ensure that member
countries seek to achieve representative democracies
that include women, men, young persons and
politically marginalized groups. The Secretary-General
of the Commonwealth appoints election observers and
monitors to support elections in member States. They
report on the conduct of elections in countries such as
Cameroon, Papua New Guinea, Malawi, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tanzania and a number of others.
In the Commonwealth we reaffirm our conviction that
gender equality is a fundamental premise in achieving
representative democracy.

The second element is increased participation and
representation of women at all levels. Commonwealth
ministers for women and gender affairs have adopted a
new Plan of Action for Gender Equality. In the Plan of
Action the ministers recalled the 1991 Harare
Declaration, which was adopted by Commonwealth
heads of Government and urged member States to
promote gender equality as a fundamental principle of
democracy, good governance and peace both within the
Commonwealth and throughout the world. In
furtherance of those objectives, efforts are under way
to establish a regional leadership training institute for
Caribbean women in politics, an undertaking that was
the result of a workshop organized by the
Commonwealth secretariat and other partners.

It is envisaged that such initiatives will promote
women's increased participation and representation in
decision-making at all levels. Women's representation
and participation is critical because, for women to be
able to influence policies and decisions that affect their
lives and those of their societies, especially in conflict
and post-conflict situations, their political, social,
cultural and economic empowerment through access to
decision-making must form part of the democratic
ideal.

To further promote women's representation, the
Commonwealth Secretary-General regularly appoints
special envoys to countries to monitor developments in
member States that are likely to result in conflict. Such
envoys work with member countries to carry out
dialogue and prevent conflicts before they occur. Some
women envoys have been appointed in that regard, to
countries such as Cameroon. However, there is room
for more participation by women.

The third element relates to developing a culture
of peace through peace education. Along with other
partners, the Commonwealth is actively engaged in the
development of peace education curriculums especially
aimed at young persons, in countries such as Sierra
Leone, Sri Lanka and Uganda.

The fourth is documentation and information-
sharing and good practices. As part of our continuing
effort to provide information and document good
practices, the Commonwealth has published a new
book entitled Gender Mainstreaming in Conflict
Transformation: Building Sustainable Peace. The book
is a body of advocacy, capacity-building and policy
tools that is intended to contribute to the why and how
of implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and to
peacebuilding throughout the world.

The fifth element concerns partnerships. In
recognition of the need for collective action, the
outcome document of the Millennium Summit
(General Assembly resolution 55/2) outlined the
responsibility to protect. It thus called on Member
States and the international community to ensure the
protection of civilians, in particular women and
children, in conflict and post-conflict environments.

Along with our strong constituents at the country
level, we are working in collaboration with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and member
Governments to address some of the challenges
highlighted in resolution 1325 (2000) related to
enhancing gender awareness on the part of troops.

In conclusion, the Commonwealth recognizes that
sustainable peace, gender equality and development are
mutually reinforcing and can only be achieved when
women and men adhere to the principles of
representative democracy, which allow for dialogue
and collective action from all citizens and address their
concerns.

Five years on, our collective responsibility to
protect, as highlighted by the outcome document, must
not be ignored. We must take all necessary steps to
effectively address the challenges of resolution 1325
(2000), in particular as regards the protection of the
rights of women and children and their participation
and representation in all phases of conflict, including
prevention, resolution, peacekeeping, reconstruction
and peacebuilding. Only when women's concerns and
contributions are integrated into those processes will
we truly give meaning to that landmark resolution.

