Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Right Honourable William Hague, Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom, for holding this very important debate.
Japan appreciates the United Kingdom's initiative on
preventing sexual violence in conflict, including the
Group of Eight (G-8) process.

I also would like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict for their respective briefings. I would also
like to thank and welcome the participation of the
representatives from civil society.

Japan welcomes today's adoption of resolution
2106 (2013), which further strengthens the framework
established by the previous relevant resolutions and
contains critical operational guidance. As described in
the historic Declaration on Preventing Sexual Violence
in Conflict adopted at the Group of Eight Summit, held
in London on 11 April f the early implementation
of which was encouraged by the G-8 leaders last
week - despite various efforts, sexual violence in
conflict continues to occur in the twenty-first century,
and we share the view that more must be done to address
these ongoing crimes. Japan is committed to holding

perpetrators to account and to supporting victims.
First, in order to prevent sexual violence, we need
to raise the cost to perpetrators and end the culture
of impunity. In this regard, it is essential that we
support national Governments in meeting their own
challenges in terms of justice and accountability, and
that we strengthen international justice mechanisms.
With regard to the former, Japan is helping national
Governments to develop their legal systems and
facilitate security sector reform. With regard to the
latter, Japan attaches great importance to the role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Japan, as a leading
contributor to the ICC, believes that there is a need to
further promote the Court's universality, and expects
the dialogue and collaboration between the Security
Council and the ICC to deepen.

Furthermore, the effective investigation and
documentation of crimes of sexual violence are
instrumental in bringing perpetrators to justice. To that
end, developing the capacity of national Governments
to investigate crimes and raising awareness of and
sensitivity to sexual violence are both essential. In
that regard, Japan believes that providing standard
guidelines would be useful, and therefore supports
the development of an international protocol on the
investigation and documentation of sexual violence in
conflict.

Secondly, we also recognize the importance of
providing relief to the victims of sexual violence. Japan
is committed to ensuring that multi-sectoral assistance
and services are provided to victims. In this connection,
we would like to mention that, in April of this year,
Mr. Motoo Noguchi, a former judge in the Supreme
Court Chamber of the Extraordinary Chambers in the
Court of Cambodia, was elected Chair of the Board of
Directors of the Trust Fund for Victims.

Thirdly, Japan recently made a contribution
of $1 million to the United Nations Trust Fund to
End Violence against Women, which is managed by
UN-Women. We are also currently taking part in efforts
to raise awareness of the Fund, and to expand its donor
base, including private sector donors.

In closing, Japan reiterates its full support for
the mandate of Special Representative Bangura and
commends her proactive engagements. We would also
like to underline the important role played by the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflictin fostering national ownership, leadership
and responsibility in addressing sexual violence. Japan
strongly supports their efforts and will cooperate
closely with them.

