Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain welcomes the initiative taken by the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council to hold
this open debate, four years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. We would also like to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2004/814), which describes progress in
implementation of the resolution and highlights areas
where greater effort is still needed to attain its full
implementation.

Spain supports the statement that will be made by
the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union.

In the four years that have elapsed since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), there have
certainly been positive changes in that there is better
understanding of the serious and disproportionate
effects of armed conflict on women and girls. During
that time there has also been wider understanding of
the importance of women's participation on an equal
footing in preventing and managing conflicts, as well
as in peace negotiations, peacekeeping operations,
humanitarian assistance, reconstruction, rehabilitation
and post-conflict peace-building. Nevertheless, we are
all aware that much still remains to be done to ensure
the full and effective implementation of this important
resolution, as can clearly be seen from the report of the
Secretary-General as well as from the excellent and
knowledgeable statements that we heard at the
beginning of this meeting.

Here, I should like to focus on the issue of
gender-based violence in armed conflict. Addressing
that question at the international level has received
greater momentum over recent years as a result of the
work of the International Criminal Tribunals for the
Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda established by the
Security Council, as well as through the inclusion of
such criminal conduct within the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court, in accordance with its
Rome Statute.

Still, the facts on the ground demonstrate that,
frequently, international humanitarian law and human
rights are openly ignored by the parties to conflicts and
that women and girls continue to be the object of
sexual violence and of other particularly serious
Violations of their human rights. In our opinion, we
must immediately envisage the adoption of additional
measures in the following areas.

First, it is necessary to improve gender training
for all military, police and civilian personnel
participating in peacekeeping operations, with a view
to making assistance to victims of conflict more
effective and above all to avoid the emergence of
cases, such as those we heard about today, in which
members of such missions are involved in acts against
the safety or dignity of women or girls in areas of
conflict. We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy on this issue, and we hope that
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries will
strictly implement it.

Secondly, we must step up efforts to include a
gender perspective in transitional institutions that are
charged with post-conflict national reconciliation. Such
institutions must have staff who are specially trained in
dealing with gender-based violence and other crimes to
which women and girls could be subjected during
conflicts, in order to put an end to impunity for such
crimes.

Thirdly, we must improve the care, emergency
services and support so that women who are victims of
sexual violence in conflicts can recover in every
respect. Here, we must launch campaigns to inform
victims of their rights and of opportunities for
assistance, thus facilitating their access to the
appropriate institutions.

Fourthly, there must be greater coordination on
the part of all organs and agencies in the United
Nations system and there must be mechanisms to
assess and follow up on situations in the field and to
monitor the quality of assistance given to the victims.
This is not so much a question of forging new
mechanisms, but rather of improving the coordination
and enhancing the efficiency of existing mechanisms
by implementing a concrete plan of action.

Fifthly, we must improve the quantity and quality
of information we receive, so that the international
community's response can be more cohesively and
effectively coordinated. United Nations teams in the
field, specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations must help to publicize the true scope of
this tragedy.

As the Secretary-General rightly notes, resolution
1325 (2000) holds out a promise to women across the
globe that their rights will be protected and that
barriers to their full and equal participation in the
maintenance and promotion of sustainable peace will
be removed. Four years have elapsed since the
adoption of that resolution, and we still cannot say that
it has been fully implemented in all areas. We must
pledge that within a reasonable time period, this
promise will become a reality; that is the primary
responsibility of the Council. We therefore believe that
the Security Council should seriously consider
establishing a permanent mechanism for following up
on compliance with resolution 1325 (2000) in the
context of the various situations continuously under the
Council's consideration.

