Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for having convened this open debate on
resolution 1325 (2000) and the role of women as it
relates to peace and security. I also thank the Secretary-
General for having introduced his report (S/2010/498),
and the others who have spoken today.

I welcome the presence among us of President
Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director of UN Women
and a very distinguished representative of Latin
America.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a crucial milestone,
which we must duly underscore because it was with the
adoption of that resolution that this topic took its place
on the agenda of the Security Council and was
therefore no longer to be considered a matter of
secondary importance. Instead, it took on a crucial and
relevant role in efforts towards international peace and
security.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was the starting point for
subsequent developments in the Security Council
related to this topic, aimed at ensuring the participation
of women in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the fight
against sexual violence against women and girls. For
this reason, that resolution, together with resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), has
provided the international community with a
framework for addressing the needs of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations.

Ten years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we reiterate that the participation of women
must be an integral part of peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. This is the view of my
country, which currently has a number of female
military observers. However, we wish to broaden the
participation of women, and Peru is therefore training
female personnel, who we hope will be ready for
deployment in the second half of 2011.

As indicated by the Secretary-General in his
report on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466), women are decisive agents in the three
pillars of lasting peace: economic recovery, social
cohesion and political legitimacy. In that regard, we
agree with the Secretary-General that the participation
of women in peace processes allows for the integration
of a gender perspective in post-conflict planning,
which is essential to ensuring the participation of
women in long-term peacebuilding.

On numerous occasions in this Chamber, we have
heard truly moving testimony from women victims of
sexual violence. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict has
stated that this type of Violence is a tactic of war and as
such can be planned for and predicted. We cannot
allow it in any way to be considered an inevitable
consequence of armed conflict.

However, I must say, that recent events have
unfortunately shown us that the capacity to respond to
such acts must be greatly strengthened. As my country
has stated on other occasions, a crucial consideration in
addressing this problem is having information that
would allow us to take preventive measures and to
respond swiftly to such situations. We must explore
mechanisms that allow for reliable information
exchange on acts of sexual violence in order to take
measures aimed at reducing and fighting this scourge.
It is the View of my delegation that the capacity for
such information exchange among United Nations
agencies, the various committees of the Security
Council and the Working Group on Children in Armed
Conflict should be substantially strengthened.
Furthermore, it is important for military personnel
deployed on the ground to undergo training and
awareness-raising to enable them to respond
appropriately to situations of sexual violence.

We must also bear in mind that, as the Secretary-
General recalled, the security of women and girls is not
guaranteed once a conflict has come to an end. We
must therefore ensure that there is a focus in
post-conflict phases on the strengthening of the rule of
law that ensures respect for their rights and access to
justice. Fighting impunity for gender-based violence is
essential in the peacebuilding process, as noted by the
Peacebuilding Commission Working Group on Lessons
Learned.

With regard to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) throughout the United Nations system, the
Secretary-General, in a spirit of great transparency, has
recognized that the 2008-2009 Action Plan illuminated
the fragmentation in implementation initiatives, which
requires a comprehensive strategy to ensure that efforts
do not go to waste.

The indicators that have been presented form, in
this respect, the basis for a comprehensive
consideration of the progress made by the United
Nations system and Member States in the priority areas
of prevention, participation, protection, relief and
recovery. These clearly reflect the complementary
nature of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009). We also agree with the
Secretary-General that UN Women could serve as the
coordinating body for the follow-up on these
indicators.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report,
resolution 1325 (2000) has played an important role in
facilitating the participation of non-governmental
organizations, including women's organizations, in
promoting women's participation in peace processes.
In this regard, we should like to thank the Permanent
Missions of Austria, Mexico and the United Kingdom
for having convened an Arria Formula meeting on
19 October, which allowed us to learn more about the
work being carried out by various organizations on the
ground and to gain a better understanding of the scope
and challenges of resolution 1325 (2000).

Ten years after the adoption of the resolution, we
believe that the Security Council should consider a
number of the recommendations put forth by the
Secretary-General, in particular the possibility of
establishing a set of objectives, goals and indicators for
the next 10 years, or of creating a working group to
follow up on the resolution.

We have made progress in recognizing the
importance of the participation of women in peace and
security. However, there are many challenges that we
have yet to tackle, given that this is a matter of
changing the lives of women and girls, who have the
right to live free from fear and violence, enjoying
respect and equal opportunities.

