Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): First, I thank the United
Kingdom for organizing today's debate.

Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union (EU).

Trafficking in persons is a gross violation of
human rights and also one of the most serious and
lucrative forms of transnational organized crime with
huge human, social and economic implications. The
problem is further exacerbated by conflicts and the
ensuing large movements of refugees and migrants
who often become easy targets of various forms of
exploitation. It is therefore imperative to accelerate
the global response to human trafficking through a
comprehensive, multidisciplinary and cross-border
approach. In a globalized world, no country alone can
disentangle the webs of traffickers. Better cooperation
should be established among countries of origin, transit
and destination in connection with information sharing,
victim identification, support and reintegration.

In recent years Bulgaria has enhanced its law
enforcement cooperation with countries in the
European Union and other partners with regard to
irregular migration, smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in human beings. Bulgarian law enforcement
authorities are active partners in numerous EU-led and
transnational operations aimed at curbing trafficking
and smuggling and bringing perpetrators to justice.
As an external border of the European Union, Bulgaria
pays special attention to the nexus between conflict
and trafficking in persons and actively supports United
Nations-led efforts to end political and security crises
in the region, which are conducive to migration flows.

The early identification of victims of trafficking
in mixed migration flows is one of the main priorities
of the Bulgarian national commission for combatting
trafficking in persons, which has established strong
partnerships with the relevant United Nations bodies
and other organizations aimed at ensuring the effective
management of migration processes and respect for the
human rights of all persons. The Bulgarian Government
invests in building capacities to identify potential and
actual victims of trafficking among migrants and
asylum seekers and to provide adequate protection, in
particular to children on the move.

Bulgaria is committed to the implementation of
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto,
known as the Palermo Protocols, which represent
a solid foundation of international law in this area.
Furthermore, Bulgaria welcomed the first-ever Security
Council resolution on the trafficking of persons in
conflict situations - resolution 2331 (2016), adopted
last December.

Bulgaria is one of the countries in Europe with
the most comprehensive institutional framework to
combat trafficking in persons. Bulgaria was one of the
pioneers in Europe to adopt specialized anti-trafficking
legislation, in 2003. Bulgaria has penalized trafficking
in line with the highest international legal standards and
has gone one step further by introducing more severe
punishment for crimes involving children as victims.
A national commission for combatting trafficking in
persons is operating at the central level, and there are
nine local anti-trafficking commissions specialized in
preventing trafficking among vulnerable communities.
The new national anti-trafficking strategy for the
period from 2017 to 2021 has a special focus on early
detection and prevention.

Trafficking is a gendered phenomenon, and
the majority of the victims are women and girls. In
Bulgaria, as elsewhere in the world, the majority of
victims trafficked for sexual exploitation are women
and girls. In View of that, the national anti-trafficking
commission of Bulgaria provides specialized assistance
to women victims of trafficking in three Government-
funded shelters.

Given the particular vulnerability of children to
trafficking, annual prevention campaigns are organized
in schools in partnership with local authorities,
academia, civil society and a network of youth
volunteers. A specialized coordination mechanism for
referrals and assistance for unaccompanied children and
child victims of trafficking has also been established.
In the coming months, the Bulgarian authorities
will also open a new specialized facility to provide
protection, assistance and reintegration of child victims
of trafficking.

