Mr. Mikayilli (Azerbaijan): We would like to
express our appreciation to the Russian presidency for
convening this open debate and to thank all the briefers
for their valuable contributions.

The consequences of armed conflict and violence,
as well as the erosion of respect for international
humanitarian and international human rights law,
continue to have a devastating impact on millions of
women and girls across the globe. We are deeply alarmed
by the current displacement crisis and the wide range
of violations that displaced people are facing. Effective
protection measures in situations of displacement
are required. In that context, the importance of
gender-responsive approaches to refugee and migrant
movements, as advocated by the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2016/822), cannot be overemphasized.

The growing spread of violent extremism and
terrorism also causes unspeakable suffering to women
and girls. As it was highlighted during the Security
Council open debate (see S/PV.7704) on conflict related
sexual violence held in June, sexual violence is now
also used as a tactic of terrorism. Moreover, restricting
women's rights in conflict settings through the
misappropriation of religion has become widespread
and is a very dangerous development. It is therefore
crucial to integrate the gender perspective while
putting in place strategies to counter terrorism and
violent extremism.

Access to education in crisis situations is vital not
only in addressing the gender gap in school enrolment,
but also for the empowerment of women and girls. We
are encouraged by the commitment set out in the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (General Assembly resolution 71/ 1) to provide all children with
education within a few months of their arrival.

We strongly condemn all acts of violence against
women and girls in situations of armed conflict.
Parties to conflict should respect their obligations
under international humanitarian and international
human rights law and bring the perpetrators to justice
to combat impunity and ensure accountability. In the
same vein, we support ongoing measures to prevent
and address cases of sexual exploitation and abuse in
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

We welcome the contribution that landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) has made to an increased
recognition of the plight of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. In particular, the inclusion
of the protection of civilians in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations; the incorporation of women-
and peace- and security-related provisions to peace
agreements; the appointment of women as mediators,
special representatives, special envoys and heads of
missions; the increase in the number of female military
and police personnel in United Nations missions; the
establishment of the post of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict; the adoption of national action plans on
women and peace and security; and the mainstreaming
of gender equality and women's empowerment in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can all
be highlighted.

The suffering ofmillions of women and girls cannot
be alleviated without putting an end to armed conflicts.
That is a reality that we are facing in Azerbaijan every
day. As it is well-documented by the United Nations
and the Security Council, Armenia has unleashed a war
and used force against Azerbaijan, occupied almost one
fifth of its territory, carried out ethnic cleansing and
committed other serious crimes during the conflict.
Hundreds ofthousands ofAzerbaij ani forcibly displaced
persons are still deprived of the right to return to their
homes. Regular ceasefire violations and attacks on
Azerbaijani towns and villages have recently become
more frequent and violent, resulting in the killing or
injuring of many Azerbaijani civilians. The most
recent large-scale attack by the Armenian armed forces
took place in April and claimed the lives of innocent
civilians within the population of Azerbaijan. The
April escalation was a vivid reminder that the status
quo is dangerous and has the potential to re-escalate at
any time, with unpredictable consequences.

In that regard, we fully support the call of the
Secretary-General to redouble efforts to prevent and
resolve conflicts, allowing for the realization of a more
peaceful world.

The President (spoke in Russian) I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.

