Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on such an important
matter. On behalf of the 15 States members of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), I
wish to express appreciation to you, Sir, for providing
us with an insightful concept note (S/2015/32, annex) to
guide today's discussion on protection challenges and
needs faced by women and girls in armed conflict as
well as in post-conflict situations. Let me also thank all
of the briefers for their comprehensive briefings at the
commencement of the debate this morning.

In recent years, the world has witnessed an upsurge
in conflicts that have led to an unprecedented increase
in violence against women and girls. The increase in
violence leading to humanitarian catastrophes has had
a disproportionate impact on women and girls. Women
and girls are more vulnerable as a result of gender
inequality and of being directly targeted as part of war
tactics and deliberate assaults on their rights.

It is widely recognized that emerging unconventional
threats to peace and security associated with the
proliferation of militias, armed groups, jihadists and
terrorists linked to violent extremism affect women and
girls more than their male counterparts. In that regard,
women and girls constitute one of the most vulnerable
groups in armed conflict, as well as in post-conflict
situations.

It is estimated that three quarters of the population
of refugees and internally displaced persons are women
and girls. Displacement exacerbates existing gender
inequalities, thereby amplifying the discrimination
and hardships borne by both women and girls. It also
causes women heightened risk to poverty, human
trafficking, sexual exploitation and child, early and
forced marriages.

SADC recognizes that the majority of the world's
conflicts are in Africa. We believe that States have
the primary responsibility to protect their women
and girls from all forms of gender-based abuse,
particularly in conflict situations. While international
cooperation and assistance are important, they should
not and cannot replace the role ofthe State in protecting
women and girls. We also recognize that the economic
empowerment of women is essential in any prevention
and protection response.

In the year 2000, the Security Council laid the
foundation for the women and peace and security
agenda in the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), which
calls for the special protection and full participation of
women in conflict prevention and resolution, as well
as in post-conflict and peacebuilding processes. Today
the narrative on conflict prevention and resolution
reflects our commitment to prevent sexual violence in
conflict and to address its disastrous and far-reaching
consequences.

At the continental level, the launch, on 2 June 2014,
in Addis Ababa, of the African Union (AU) five-year
Gender, Peace and Security Programme attests to
Africa's commitment to addressing challenges and
needs faced by women and girls in conflict and post-
conflict settings. The Programme is designed to serve as
a framework for the development of effective strategies
and mechanisms for increased participation in the
promotion of peace and security. The appointment by
the AU Commission Chairperson of a Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security reaffirms the continent's
commitment to firmly addressing issues affecting
women and girls in conflict situations.

At the regional level, the SADC Protocol on Gender
and Development, signed in August 2008, seeks to
harmonize the various commitments made by member
States in continental instruments to achieving gender
equality. Articles 20 to 25 of the Protocol provide for
the implementation of a variety of strategies, including
enacting, reforming, reviewing and enforcing laws
aimed at eliminating all forms of gender-based violence
and trafficking. Article 28 of the Protocol provides for
the equal representation and participation of women in
key decision-making positions in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes, as well as for the integration
of a gender perspective in the resolution of conflicts, in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security.

While considerable progress has been achieved
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), gaps
remain in trying to achieve sustained change and overall
peace and security. There is growing consensus that a
peace process that does not include women is flawed.
It is our firm belief that women's economic, cultural,
political and social rights underpin democracy, stability
and lasting peace.

However, it is regrettable that, in spite of the
existence of legal and normative frameworks, women
and girls continue to suffer. SADC is concerned
about continued gross abuses, sexual exploitation and
abduction of women in areas of conflict. We urge the
international community to collectively respond to the
specific needs of women and girls in armed conflict
and to enhance the integration of a gender perspective
in the work of United Nations entities and partners in a
holistic manner. That entails addressing the root causes
of conflict and strengthening national infrastructure
for peace and reconciliation. We need to do more
work on deterring newcrimes by holding perpetrators
accountable. More attention should be given to
women's roles as leaders and to teir participation in
decision-making, which must be meaningful in order
to realize opportunities for positive change. Women
should not be viewed merely as victims and survivors,
but also as a great resource for the communities
and countries they live in. We know that women's
participation is essential to building sustainable peace,
and it is therefore important to ensure that the women
and peace and security agenda is duly reflected in
all engagements relating to international peace and
security.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
continuing strong support of the Southern African
Development Community for the women and peace and
security agenda.

