Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Ms. Ines Alberdi, Ms. Sarah Taylor and Mr. Alain Le
Roy for the very useful information that they provided,
and we thank the Secretary-General for the preparation
of his thematic report (S/2008/622).

Resolution 1325 (2000) remains our most
important guideline in enhancing the role of women in
conflict prevention and settlement, post-conflict
rehabilitation and the protection of women's rights
during conflicts. We must implement the resolution's
provisions by creating equal opportunities for women
to participate actively in all peacekeeping and security
efforts and in enhancing their role in decision-making.
To that end, we must ensure genuine overall gender
equality. Therefore, efforts in that area should be
undertaken not only by the Security Council, but also
by other relevant United Nations organs, including the
General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Human Rights Council and the Commission on the
Status of Women.

Women can make an even greater contribution to
conflict prevention and settlement in all their aspects.
In post-conflict rehabilitation, we must make broader
use of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women as a fundamental
document. We must also devote greater attention to
gender mainstreaming in United Nations efforts to
reduce poverty and address inequality as sources of
conflict. Here, we could refer to, inter alia, increased
participation by women in decision-making on social
and economic issues and in establishing national
frameworks for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals.

We welcome the concrete steps taken by the
United Nations system to guarantee the exercise of
women's rights. We believe that there is a need to make
more active use of the expertise of the Special Adviser
on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. At the
same time, we note that the Secretary-General's report
does not provide a comprehensive response to the
Council's earlier question regarding the impact of
armed conflict on women and girls in situations on the
Council's agenda. Only one page is devoted to that
very important topic, and a whole set of serious issues
is simply overlooked. Another issue, the protection of
women in armed conflict, is virtually reduced to the
problem of sexual violence, while other crimes against
women are ignored. Such an approach significantly
reduces the tasks mandated by resolution 1325 (2000).
From the perspective of the Security Council's Charter
objectives, it should focus first and foremost on the
most pressing, large-scale armed conflicts.

The United Nations should, as a priority, respond
to systematic mass violence against women and
children. Equal attention should be given to all
categories of such violence in conflicts. Of serious
concern are cases in which women and children are
killed or injured, including as a result of the
indiscriminate or excessive use of force. Unfortunately,
recent examples of that can be found in many parts of
the world. Such crimes often go unpunished or are
justified by citing the unavoidable nature of so-called
collateral damage. We believe that the Council should
assess such cases in an unbiased and principled
manner.

It is important that gender mainstreaming in
United Nations work, including in the field, yield
concrete results in the protection and advancement of
women and girls in conflict and post-conflict societies.
That requires balanced system-wide approaches that
provide, first and foremost, for the full participation of
women themselves in those processes.

