Ms. Hrda (Czech Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first of all to thank the Spanish Presidency
for organizing this debate, which is so important to all
of us here today. For there to be more than 110 names
on the list speaks for itself. I would also like to thank
all those who participated in the preparatory process.

(spoke in English)

Resolution 1325 (2000) was definitely a
visionary document, which perfectly recognized the
role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, in peace negotiations, in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, in humanitarian response and in post-
conflict reconstruction. We have before us, 15 years
after its adoption, a global study on its implementation
that shows remarkable progress according to specific
indicators and identifies gaps to be filled, emerging
trends and priorities for action.

The Czech Republic takes the agenda in resolution
1325 (2000) very seriously, and we have tried hard to
implement it, both nationally and internationally. At
the national level, our Government recently approved
its first long-term framework document for gender
equality, and the Czech Ministry of Defence adopted an
action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000), which
will require a considerable effort on the part of the
Ministry, both to meet its obligations pursuant to the
resolution and to inform experts from the public and the
organizations concerned about the measures adopted to
implement the resolution.

Internationally, the Czech Republic became the
lead nation of a programme requested as part of a
partnership for cooperation in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), with a focus on training female
Jordanian soldiers in explosive ordnance disposal.
In more general terms, the Czech Republic seeks
to strengthen women's position in society through
development cooperation and humanitarian aid.
The goal is enshrined in our strategy of multilateral
foreign development cooperation, and in fulfilling
those priorities we cooperate with the relevant United
Nations agencies, in particular UN-Women, the United
Nations Population Fund, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. In the field
of humanitarian aid, we pay special attention to the
victims of gender-based violence.

Gender perspective continues to be taken into
account also as a cross-cutting target within projects in
countries such as Iraq, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic, Syria and Ukraine. In addition to traditional
means of foreign policy, the Czech Republic uses a
financial instrument aimed at supporting democracy
and human rights, the so-called transition promotion
programme, which makes use of our recent experiences
with the social transition and democratization of the
country. Gender mainstreaming belongs to the cross-
cutting principle reflected in that programme.

In recent years, in cooperation with
non-governmental organizations, we have implemented
a number of projects in more than seven countries,
including Myanmar, Zimbabwe, Palestine and Egypt,
focused especially on protecting women's rights
and on enhancing their participation in public life.
The study comprehensively demonstrates that the
participation of women at all levels is the key to the
operational effectiveness, success and sustainability
of peace-process, peacebuilding and peacekeeping
efforts. That is one of the reasons why the Czech
Republic has negotiated several times in Geneva a
resolution on equal political participation that urges
all States to eliminate the barriers that limit the full
and effective participation of all segments of society,
including women, in political affairs. The resolution
has always been adopted by consensus and sponsored
by a large number of countries.

I look forward to the day when resolutions such as
1325 (2000) and others concerning equal participation,
which have been so widely recognized and supported,
will become obsolete because all their principles have
been fully and globally implemented and are, of course,
fully respected.

