Mr. Staur (Denmark): Allow me first of all to
express my appreciation for the very constructive
concept paper (S/2008/655) presented for this open
debate of the Security Council. It is very important that
the Security Council focus on women's equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security,
which of course is the main thrust of resolution 1325
(2000).

The latest report (S/2008/622) of the Secretary-
General states that progress has been made in
incorporating gender perspectives in national policies,
raising awareness, developing programmatic tools and
enhancing women's participation in conflict prevention,
peace processes, peacebuilding, peacekeeping operations,
security sector reforms and in combating sexual
violence.

That progress is positive, but the Secretary-
General's report also confirms existing institutional
and organizational gaps and challenges in the
implementation of the resolution. In the report, a
specific assessment is made of the protection of
women, in particular against sexual and gender-based
violence, and the report notes that despite efforts by the
United Nations, violence against women persists and
there is an urgent need for increased efforts to
prosecute perpetrators.

The report also refers to the June open debate at
the ministerial level on women and peace and security,
which focused on sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. The Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1820 (2008), stressing that sexual violence
as a tactic of war can significantly exacerbate
situations of armed conflict. It demands that all parties
immediately protect civilians from all forms of sexual
violence and affirms the Council's intention to consider
targeted sanctions against perpetrators.

Denmark was a sponsor of that resolution.
Women and girls are especially vulnerable to sexual
abuse during violent conflict and post-conflict
situations. The use of often systematic gender-based
violence as a strategy of war, impunity for perpetrators
and the absence of gender justice are challenges that
urgently need to be addressed.

So far, we have experienced had limited
international focus on the protection of women as
victims and even less focus on their right to participate
and on their potential resources, all of which should be
at the centre of our attention. We need to change that.

The potential contributions of women in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
reconstruction in post-conflict situations can hardly be
overestimated. Implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is thus of the utmost importance. It has now
been eight years since the Council called for women's
participation and full involvement in all efforts to
maintain and promote peace and security. Since then,
the Security Council has often reiterated the need for
the United Nations system, Member States and all
other relevant actors to promote equal participation.

At the end of the day, it is the results that count.
So, where are we now, eight years later? Have we
really increased the participation of women in conflict
resolution and in peacebuilding? The short answer is
that we do not really know. Satisfactory data are still
missing. What we do know, however, is that we are
still facing a vital challenge.

Denmark was one of the very first countries to
formulate a national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). That plan has now been
revised, in an all-of-government approach and with the
comprehensive cooperation of all walks of the Danish
society. The first objective of the plan is to achieve
greater active participation of women in peacebuilding
at the international and local levels.

We strongly believe - and various studies
support this idea - that sustainable peace demands the
active involvement of women at all levels. It is certain
that national plans for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) will contribute to the crafting of improved
solutions to the challenges we face.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that we all
have an obligation - all of us - to move much faster
to promote and safeguard the right of women to
participate in shaping actions towards equitable peace.
Denmark looks forward to continued cooperation with
all members of the Council to fulfil that obligation.

