Mr. Kim (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the Human Security
Network, namely, Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, the Netherlands,
Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand and South
Africa as observer.

The role and contribution of women are critical to
the promotion of the human security agenda, shifting
the traditional emphasis from inter-State security to
people-centred security. The Network thanks the
Japanese presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open debate and welcomes its wider
format, in particular the inclusion of voices of civil
society representatives from Burundi and Timor-Leste.

Six years after the adoption of the landmark
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), there is not
much room and not much reason for complacency.
Women are still not equal partners in peace processes
and gender-based violence is increasing. We stress the
importance of better implementation of the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
therefore strongly call for the creation of a Security
Council mechanism to monitor its own actions in
integrating resolution 1325 (2000), as well as other
related resolutions, into its daily work. We also expect
the Security Council to meet with civil society
organizations, including women's groups, when on a
mission to conflict-affected countries or regions. That
will underpin the commitment to developing national-
level coordination strategies or action plans on the
implementation of the resolution.

In many post-war situations, women's
organizations will be among the first to organize
themselves as civil society voices, yet among the last
to be able to access formal decision-making structures
and processes. That trend needs to be reversed and,
while recognition of the contribution of women's
networks and grassroots peacebuilding initiatives to
peace consolidation processes is growing, we still need
to integrate them much better.

Both the Security Council and the newly
established Peacebuilding Commission need to pay
special and full attention to integrating women equally
into formal peace processes. If we wish to aim at long-
term and durable peace, all parts of society need to part
take in it, including women. Looking at different cases
of negotiations in the past, it is striking to note the near
total lack of women peace envoys to date. It is clear
that at all levels - local, national and, indeed, the
highest international level - women should be
included in conflict-resolution efforts in accordance
with resolution 1325 (2000).

It is vital to operationalize resolution 1325 (2000)
in the work of all United Nations bodies, particularly in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) in
particular has done a lot in recent years to support the
mainstreaming of the gender perspective in conflict
prevention, resolution and reconstruction, including by
supporting grass-roots women's organizations. The
Peacebuilding Commission and other United Nations
bodies would be wise to draw fully on that expertise
and experience and to include the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, UNIFEM. and other relevant
actors into the Commission's discussions on
integrating the gender perspective fully into its work.
We have noted in previous open debates of the
Security Council the alarmingly pervasive nature of
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict-affected
areas. Sexual violence is repeatedly and with
frightening persistence used as a deliberate method of
warfare. Therefore, the issue of violence against
women needs to receive adequate attention during and
after armed conflict. Members of the Network urge the
Council to systematically incorporate gender
considerations in all aspects of mission planning and
execution, particularly from the outset. All
peacekeeping missions need to strictly obey the zero
tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse and to put in
place disciplinary measures to address any violations.

We need to prevent violence against women and
to ensure accountability for it. We welcome the release
of the Secretary-General's study on violence against
women and we fully concur that there is a need to
eliminate impunity for gender-based violence so that
women can play a meaningful role in the
reconstruction of their communities and benefit from
peace dividends.

As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
awareness and action on the System-wide Action Plan
are still being promoted in a sporadic rather than a
systematic and holistic approach. Insufficient gender
mainstreaming and gender empowerment are true of
the international community as a whole when dealing
with conflict resolution and peacebuilding. We call on
both the Security Council and the new Peacebuilding
Commission to take the lead towards creating a
genuinely gender-blind culture, which will provide
benefits to individuals in society and to society as a
whole.

