Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating the Mission of
Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency and on
organizing this open debate, which reflects the resolute
commitment of the Security Council to the effective
follow-up and implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) almost 10 years since its adoption. We thank the
Secretary-General for submitting his report
(S/2009/465). We endorse the recommendations
contained therein, in particular regarding the
establishment of monitoring and accountability
mechanisms for the implementation of the resolution at
the national, regional and international levels.

Argentina is among those countries that have
made progress in developing an implementation plan
for resolution 1325 (2000) in the defence sector. At the
same time, it is drafting a national plan that addresses
all the areas included in that instrument, and has
incorporated specific policies for the implementation
of resolution 1820 (2008) on sexual violence against
women in situations of armed conflict.

The participation of women in post-conflict
peacebuilding processes can be analysed from the
standpoint both of the United Nations system and of
the State. In the first case, it is essential to address the
issue of gender from the planning stage of activities in
the field and to sustain it in all phases of reconstruction
and peacebuilding. To that end, it is necessary to
improve the information systems of the various United
Nations agencies and programmes so as to have a full
understanding of the situation of women in a given
place. At the same time, the cooperation of Member
States is required in order to increase the participation
of women in the field as civilian, military or police
personnel.

From the viewpoint of the State, it is important
that the role of women in post-conflict reconstruction
activities be incorporated into national implementation
plans for resolution 1325 (2000). That involves not
only the deployment of a larger number of women in
the field, but also acknowledgement of the effective
role that women can perform in all stages of that
process, including as mediators in peace processes.

The empowerment of women is fundamental to
increasing their participation in reconstruction. The
new institutions should take into account the interests
and needs of women, and ensure their access to all
entities that guarantee the enjoyment of their rights.
However, at the same time, it is necessary to invest in
the education and training of women so that they can
play a role in the institutions thus established. That is
particularly important in the case of political parties,
electoral processes, judicial systems and security
institutions.

In that regard, it is crucial to work within the
State to put an end to gender violence. There is no
potential for empowerment in a climate of violence.
We therefore welcome the adoption of resolution 1888
(2009) with the broad support of United Nations
Members, and believe that its implementation will be
an effective step towards the eradication of impunity.
The role of troop-contributing countries in that task is
very important; in conjunction with the various United
Nations programmes and agencies, those countries are
in a position to advance joint initiatives to improve the
lives of the women in missions in which they
participate. Thus, for example, together with the
United Nations Development Fund for Women,
Argentina is currently organizing a workshop on
gender and human rights aimed at raising the gender
awareness of the Haitian authorities and people.

We believe that the systematic incorporation of
gender issues in post-conflict recovery projects cannot
be undertaken at the technical level or through
theoretical commitments, but that it depends to a large
degree on political will and adequate financing. Thus,
it is up to us to make that a reality.

