Mr. Bouah-Kamon (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I congratulate you, Mr. President, on France's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. It is a great pleasure for my
delegation to take part in this debate on sexual violence
in conflict situations. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2016/361), and through him we also
wish to thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura and her team
for their commitment and determination to figh sexual
violence in the context of conflicts. I also wish to thank
and congratulate Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro and
Ms. Lisa Davis for their excellent respective briefings.

The rise and recurrence of sexual violence during
conflicts are without doubt one of the major problems
facing countries in conflict and those emerging
from conflict. That violence, which has disastrous
consequences for the victims, their families and
the community, is unacceptable and constitutes a
grave violation of international humanitarian law,
international criminal law and international human
rights law. Sexual violence in conflict must therefore
be vigorously combated, and the perpetrators must be
prosecuted before the competent courts to answer for
their actions.

My country, which has undergone nearly a decade
of crisis, has unfortunately recorded cases of sexual
Violence, essentially in the form of individual and mass
rapes. In its firm will to combat that phenomenon, the
Ivorian Government has, in addition to availing itself of
the existing legal frameworks, implemented a national
strategy against gender-based violence. Accordingly,
the reported cases of sexual violence in C6te d'Ivoire
committed during the period of conflict have today a
legal framework in which they can be put on the docket.
Along with the ongoing capacity-building of the
judiciary, the majority of perpetrators - whether their
status be civilian or military - once apprehended, are
prosecuted before the competent courts.

With regard to military personnel in particular, the
Ministry of Defence has implemented several specific
measures since 2011, including a plan of action for
the Forces republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire (FRCI) in
connection with violence linked to conflicts. The plan
of action is defined along four major lines, namely,
strengthening the capacities of the FRCI to respond
to conflict-related sexual violence; strengthening
the institutional framework for the prevention and
suppression of sexual violence within the FRCI;
increasing outcomes in the fight against impunity in
connection with crimes of sexual violence committed by
the FRCI; and monitoring and evaluating the activities
and efforts aimed at fighting sexual violence committed
by the FRCI. The the plan of action of the FRCI aimed
at fighting sexual violence enjoys significant budgetary
support from the State.

As I have just indicated, the Ivorian Government is
determined both to act to suppress sexual violence linked
to conflict and to work to prevent it. My country adheres
to the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy and to
the relevant provisions of the subsequent resolutions of
the General Assembly. My delegation welcomes the fact
that the report of the Secretary-General mentions the
efforts undertaken by the Government of my country
and the entire readiness of the Ivorian authorities to
cooperate in complete transparency with the competent
entities within the United Nations system.

Nevertheless, my delegation has questions with
regard to certain allegations contained in the report,
such as that of a victim of 2 years and 10 months of
age. As far as it is concerned, the Ivorian Government
is fully committed to continue its tireless efforts aimed
at combatting sexual violence within its military units.
Accordingly, it has urged the FRCI senior command to
adopt a code of conduct intended for all members of the
armed forces.

In conclusion, given the progress made in the fight
against sexual violence and the return to stability and
peace in Cote d'Ivoire, my Government requests the
delisting of the FRCI from the list appended to the
forthcoming report of the Secretary-General to be
published this year.

