Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I should like at the
outset to thank you, Madam President, for your
personal leadership in the fight against sexual violence
in armed conflict. I should also like to thank
Ambassador Susan Rice and the United States Mission
in New York for the energy and determination they
have demonstrated in conducting our work on this
resolution in recent weeks.

We believe that this resolution will significantly
contribute to strengthening the United Nations
response to sexual violence in conflict situations. We
see a particular need for the strategic leadership that a
newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General can provide. Her or his work will
help us address this scourge on a systematic basis in
each and every conflict situation where acts of sexual
violence occur. With this goal in view, we also look
forward to the upcoming proposals to be submitted by
the Secretary-General on enhancing monitoring and
reporting on sexual violence. I should like to add that
we very much appreciate the personal commitment of
the Secretary-General in this matter.

Today's resolution will, we hope, also pave the
way for a much more systematic flow of information
between United Nations peacekeeping missions and the
sanctions committees of the Council on sexual violence
in areas of conflict. Where necessary, the Council must
ensure the accountability of those responsible for
sexual violence in armed conflict, including through
the establishment of commissions of inquiry, referrals
to the International Criminal Court and the imposition
of targeted measures.

At the same time, it is absolutely unacceptable
that civilians, in particular women and girls, also
continue to fall victim to sexual violence on a daily
basis in conflict zones where United Nations
peacekeeping missions have a key responsibility for
their protection. The fight against sexual violence must
therefore also be at the core of our overall civilian
protection agenda. Austria thus pledges to take this
work forward when the Council next considers the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts during our
presidency of the Security Council in the month of
November.

