Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
Bolivia for convening this important open debate, and
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/900). We
would like to highlight two themes from the report. The
first is women's participation in peacekeeping and the
second is the barriers to women's access to essential
services in conflict and humanitarian situations.

Earlier this month, New Zealand hosted the
annual conference of the International Association
of Peacekeeping Training Centres (IAPTC), which
included workshops on the women and peace and
security agenda. We were gratified to see a continued
commitment to the greater participation of women in
peacekeeping operations and to see ideas shared openly
and constructively. New Zealand, which currently holds
the presidency of the IAPTC, is pleased to share that
New Zealand's Colonel Helen Cooper is its first female
President in its 24-year history. Over the coming year,
we will be working with some of the peacekeeping
training centres on initiatives to further commitments
on women and peace and security commitments.

Besides participation in peacekeeping,
the Secretary-General's report highlights the
discriminatory barriers that women and girls face in
conflict and humanitarian situations. We know that
women and girls are disproportionately exposed to a
high risk of violations of their human rights in such
situations. Empirical evidence shows that reduced
access to sexual and reproductive health services
results in the needless loss of lives, owing to increased
rates of unsafe abortions and preventable maternal
mortality and morbidity. Removing discriminatory
barriers to access is critical to ensuring the health
and safety of women and girls. Women and girls must
have power over their own lives, including the right to
fully control and freely decide matters relating to their
sexual and reproductive health and rights. We welcome
the adoption of Human Rights Council resolution 39/10,
on preventable maternal mortality and morbidity and
human rights in humanitarian settings.

We all benefit when the women and peace and
security agenda is fully realized. We build safer and
more prosperous societies, our peacekeeping efforts are
more likely to take hold and we improve the chances
of achieving sustainable peace. I want to affirm that
New Zealand, as the first country to recognize women's
suffrage, remains committed to realizing that agenda.
As we near the end of the time frame for our first
national action plan, we look forward to working with
civil society to identify ambitious targets and actions
for our second.

