Mr. Mayr-Harting: I speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia, the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align
themselves with this declaration.

I first wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, as well as Mr. Herve Ladsous
and Ms. Amina Megheirbi, as the civil society
representative, for their statements.

Sexual violence in armed conflict remains
alarmingly widespread. It includes instances of
systematic targeting of civilians by armed forces and
groups, with the aim to destroy and humiliate. It is a
crime and a serious violation of human rights that
remains underreported - due to stigmatization, the
possibility of reprisal and the perception that justice
and aid would be hard or unlikely to come by.

We therefore welcome the report (S/2012/33) of
the Secretary-General and the work of Special
Representative Wallstrom on the implementation of the
Security Council resolutions on women, peace and
security.

The establishment of the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence has made an important contribution towards
more systematic and detailed information flow to the
Council. We especially appreciate the information
provided on parties to armed conflict credibly
suspected of committing, or being responsible for, acts
of rape or other forms of sexual violence, as well as the
list of parties annexed to the report. The systematic
collection of accurate, reliable and objective
information is a crucial basis for timely action to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.

We commend the coordination and cooperation
envisioned in the implementation of those
arrangements with the relevant parts of the United
Nations system, including the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict, the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
human rights components of the United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We welcome the finalization of
the terms of reference of the women's protection
advisers and call for their swift designation within the
United Nations missions' human rights and gender
components. Preventing sexual violence should be our
utmost priority. We therefore welcome the development
of early warning indicators specific to conflict-related
sexual violence and the scenario based predeployment
training modules by the United Nations system, which
we hope will enhance the capacity of the peacekeepers
to respond. A holistic approach that includes women's
full participation in decision-making in peace and
security is key to effectively preventing and responding
to sexual violence.
5
It is crucial to sustained peace and development
that we address impunity for sexual violence. It is the
duty of all States to investigate and prosecute those
crimes. We commend the efforts of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law, including their support to
countries in ending impunity - for example, through
assistance to prosecution support cells established by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
deployment of female magistrates in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also encourage the Council
to use all means at its disposal to end impunity for
sexual violence in conflict, including through referrals
to International Criminal Court, mandating
commissions of inquiry and by explicitly condemning
such violations.

We call on the Council to continue to make use of
the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence, including by using the
list contained in the report, as a basis for more focused
United Nations engagement with the parties listed,
including, as appropriate, measures in accordance with
the procedures of the relevant sanctions committees.
We hope that the Secretary-General's report will also
encourage the inclusion of additional information in
relevant country-specific reports and consistent
reporting across different country situations.

Finally, the European Union continues to
implement its dedicated policy on women, peace and
security, adopted in 2008, making use of tools as
diverse as development cooperation, the Common
Security and Defence Policy and political dialogue.
The varied EU support to initiatives related to women,
peace and security amounts to approximately €200
million per year.

The European Union now has gender advisers or
focal points in each of its crisis management missions
around the world. We continue our work on specific
training modules on human rights and gender in crisis-
management, ensuring a focus on sexual violence in
armed conflicts.

The EU continues to work closely with the
United Nations - for example, through its support to
UN-Women in carrying out the project "Women
Connect across Conflicts", which is aimed at building
accountability for the implementation of the Council's
relevant resolutions.
The European Union and its member States
highly appreciate the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
as well as that of the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We will continue
to engage with the Office of the Special Representative
and welcome its contribution to strengthening the
efforts of the United Nations, Member States and all
actors involved in preventing and responding to
conflict-related sexual violence.

