Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
my delegation would like to express its appreciation to
all the parties involved in holding these open debates on

women and peace and security, pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000), for the second time this year.

My delegation would like to state that the situation
ofwomen in areas ofconflict in the Sudan has witnessed
considerable progress compared to previous periods,
thanks to the efforts of my Government, embodied in
the signing of the Darfur Peace Agreement with some
armed rebel movements, including the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM). It should be recalled that
there are a number of rebel movements still outside
the peace process. They still violate human rights in
areas of conflict, including acts of violence and sexual
violence against women and girls. The Council should
therefore send a strong signal to those movements to
compel them to sit at the negotiation table and to desist
from perpetrating grave violations of human rights,
particularly against women and children.

In the implementation of the work plan contained in
resolution 1325 (2000), our Government established a
number of specialized centres at the central and national
levels to coordinate the efforts of women in the fields
of peace and development and to provide them with
consultative guidelines with regard to strengthening
the principles of equality and a gender perspective.

National programmes on rehabilitation,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration have
devoted special priority to the situation of women, in
close cooperation with the relevant United Nations
agencies, including UN-Women. My country has had
a national strategy on combating gender-based violence
since 2005, and has established a unit under the
Ministry of Justice to combat violence against women
and children. In order to safeguard our borders, prevent
the smuggling of weapons and stem the subversive
activities undertaken by rebel movements, which violate
human rights, particularly the rights of women and
girls, we will continue to enforce the border agreement
with Chad, as well as the tripartite agreement with
Chad and the Central African Republic, in addition to
extending the security cooperation protocol with Libya.
At the justice level, the Office of the Prosecutor General
in Darfur continues to look into reports submitted by
victims.

In addition to the efforts deployed by the advisory
council for human rights in Darfur, social services
and security units as well as the unit against violence
against women, the Government this month launched
the 10-year national action plan on human rights as a
clear-cut national strategy to enhance the situation of
human rights in the Sudan. The plan was welcomed by
the United Nations independent expert on human rights
during his latest visit to the Sudan earlier this month.
The Government ofthe Sudan emphasizes its interest in
enhancing the rights of women and in protecting them,
and reiterates its wish to continue cooperation with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as with the relevant
institutions. We will also continue our cooperation with
the relevant United Nations agencies with regard to
capacity-building.

In conclusion, my delegation wish to underscore
that the Secretary-General's reports must contain
verifiable and correct information. Government bodies
must be informed of the contents of those reports long
enough before they are published, so that Governments
can comment and take the necessary steps on them in
the event that they prove true. We also call upon the
Council to deploy efforts to address such root causes of
conflict as poverty, a lack of development and climate
change.

