The Secretary-General: Thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening this important meeting
on conflict-related sexual violence, an issue of grave
importance to the innumerable civilians who have been
affected, to all of us around the table and to the entire
United Nations system. I welcome Rwanda's initiative
and your presence here today. I also thank the Security
Council for its recognition of this matter as a serious
concern for international peace and security.
Wartime rape not only destroys individual lives,
it lays waste to families and communities. It is also
an impediment to reconciliation and sustainable
development. Thanks to the Council, the world now
has a solid framework for preventing and addressing
conflict-related sexual violence. Resolutions 1325
(2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) help
guide the work of United Nations agencies, Member
States and other stakeholders. My dynamic and
persuasive Special Representative on this issue carries
out global advocacy.

Other important actors and tools include the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, the women protection advisers and the
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements. The
report now before the Council (S/2013/149) reflects
the progressive improvement of analysis and data over
the past few years, which is a direct result of greater
awareness on the ground and the strengthened capacities
of missions to monitor, investigate and respond.

As we learn more about sexual violence used as a
tactic of war, certain patterns are becoming clear. One
is that the negative effects of wartime rape persist long
after the guns fall silent. From the Balkans to Africa,
United Nations entities and others continue to provide
vital medical and psychosocial support to victims and
survivors. Another pattern we see is that, although this
Vicious crime disproportionately affects women and
girls, men and boys are also targeted.

My Special Representative has also noted other
emerging trends, including the link between conflict-
related sexual violence and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources; the impact of sexual violence on
displacement; and the importance of addressing sexual
violence during ceasefire negotiations, wider peace
processes and security-sector reform efforts. Building
on the work of her predecessor and of the 13-entity
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
network, which she chairs, my Special Representative
has continued to fight impunity for conflict-related
sexual violence. Ms. Bangura has stressed prosecution
as a means of prevention. But she has also emphasized
the importance of national ownership and leadership,
which I fully support.

The prosecution support cells in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, created by the Government
with the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, are a positive example of combining the
two approaches. Other peacekeeping operations intend
to carry out similar projects. The Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region also represents
an opportunity to address the root causes of conflict-
related sexual violence.

Ultimately, however, we must strengthen our
collective efforts to prevent sexual violence in the first
place.

Our peacekeeping missions in the Sudan, South
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
together with United Nations country teams, are
working to establish monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements. That is a priority that I hope we can
accomplish before the end of the year.

Together with tools such as the updated human
rights database of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the protection
monitoring project of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and other information
systems, we will be better placed to systematically
identify trends and patterns, and thereby become better
at preventing these crimes.

The sustainability of that work requires funding.
We have now deployed eight women protection advisers
in South Sudan, where the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan is the first peace mission to budget for and
appoint such advisers. We are also recruiting advisers
for our missions in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Cote d'Ivoire and the Central African Republic.
I call on Member States to provide adequate resources
for the deployment of additional advisers in those and
other situations of concern. We must make this a regular
feature of planning and budgeting.

I would also like to call for sustained funding
for the Team of Experts that works to strengthen the
capacity of national rule of law and justice actors. The
Team has worked with the authorities in Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Liberia
and South Sudan, and could do even more with the
necessary backing.

Preventing sexual violence is first and foremost a
responsibility of States, in particular of security forces,
which are often the perpetrators of that grave human
rights violation. But prevention is also a collective
responsibility. To succeed, we must use all the tools
at our disposal. That includes our peacekeeping and
political missions, our mediation efforts and our efforts
to protect human rights and deliver humanitarian
assistance. It also encompasses the work of all
those involved in building peace in the aftermath of
conflict - from restoring the rule of law and advancing
gender equality to promoting early recovery and
longer-term development. As we deepen that effort, I
look forward to the Council's sustained leadership and
support.

