The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres not only for the report (S/2018/900) that
he presented today but also for his commitment to
the issue that has brought us here today and for his
noteworthy efforts to ensure that our Organization
as a whole sets an example in terms of ensuring the
equitable representation of women. I should like
also to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, and the representative
of Palestinian civil society, Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah,
for their briefings.

History was written by men - men who have
relegated women to a secondary status, devalued
their role in society and engaged in inexcusable
forms of violence against them. We are the victims
of a patriarchal system, rooted in capitalism, that
exacerbates inequalities and the economic, social and
cultural oppression of women throughout the world.
This is the fundamental problem. This is the system
that social organizations, civil society, regional
organizations and the international community as a
whole must fight.

However, there is no doubt that it is States that bear
the primary responsibility for promoting structural
changes that grant women the place that historically has
been denied them. It is only through gender equality
and the empowerment of women that we will bring
about more just, inclusive and peaceful societies.

Women face many forms ofviolence on a daily basis
and in various situations, but none is more cruel or has
such devastating consequences as the violence resulting
from armed conflict - hence the importance of the
historic resolution 1325 (2000), which recognizes this
fact and underscores the fundamental link that exists
between respect for gender equality and international
peace and security. On the basis of that resolution and
the seven resolutions adopted by the Council on the
subject, the United Nations has undertaken many efforts
and made significant progress in their implementation
in order to effectively integrate a gender perspective
in peace processes and promote the participation
of women in them. Among those advances, we can
mention the establishment of UN-Women, the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security and others.

However, despite those efforts, the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda continues
to pose important challenges, mainly in this last
point: the inclusion of women in peace processes.
There are four pillars that make up the normative
framework created by the Security Council: prevention,
participation, protection and recovery. Each is equally
important and they complement each other to ensure
the optimal implementation of the agenda. Today we
would like to emphasize the importance of prevention
and how to achieve the active participation of women in
peace processes.

While there are similarities, each country has its own
reality and different challenges. We have highlighted the
Colombian peace process because of the mechanisms
used to promote women's participation and incorporate
a gender perspective in the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace;
and because of the gender balance in the personnel of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
which is not seen in other peace missions.

Another historic example of women who promote
peace and reconciliation in my region are the heroic
Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo. We also highlight
progress made in parliamentary representation achieved
in Somalia, the advances made in the Sahel region and
Afghanistan, among others. Those are clear examples
of the importance of women's political empowerment.

Other cases with many challenges include those
faced by the countries of the Lake Chad basin and
their fight against terrorism imposed by Boko Haram,
the stigma faced by its victims, as Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed reported after her visit to
that region, after which she went to the Democratic
Republic of Congo, where she stressed the need to
encourage women's participation in the electoral
process. Other places where women face even more
humanitarian complications are Yemen, Palestine and
the Central African Republic, among others.

Every year we meet to highlight the importance
of implementing the women and peace and security
agenda, ending sexual violence in conflict, ensuring
accountability and calling for the inclusion of women
in peace processes. But how do we do that? First, we
need empowered, free women, who are masters of
their decisions and bodies, and who are economically
independent. That is how they will be true agents of
change. How do we achieve that? This is where States
must show leadership and promote structural changes
to combat inequality, poverty and discrimination. They
should focus, first and foremost, on women.

Bolivia was an unstable country. Between 2000
and 2003, social conflicts broke out against the
privatization of water and in defence of national
sovereignty over our hydrocarbon resource reserves.
We needed a fundamental change. Therefore, one of
the first measures of the current Government was to
establish the Constituent Assembly, which was presided
over by a woman indigenous leader. We drafted a
new Constitution, which was adopted in 2009 and
established the right of women and men to participate
freely in the creation, exercise and control of political
power, on equal footing and under equal conditions.

On that basis we focused on adopting measures to
make progress in dismantling the patriarchal system
and thereby breaking down structural barriers, mainly
through the political and economic empowerment
of women. We promoted women's participation in
decision-making roles through the Electoral System
Act, which establishes parity and alternation in the lists
of male and female candidates for representative posts,
making Bolivia the second country in the world with
the highest representation of women in the Legislative
Assembly. In Bolivia, women have a majority not only
in Parliament, but also in the other elected bodies.

In the same vein, one of the most important
measures for women's economic inclusion was the
Community-based Agrarian Reform Renewal Act,
which not only guarantees the participation of women
in land restoration and distribution processes, but also
prioritizes women's right to own land. Twelve years
ago, only 10 per cent of women in Bolivia were owners
ofland. Today, in 2018, 45 per cent of land ownership is
in the hands of women.

Bolivia has experienced 12 years of fundamental
change, and without the role of women as agents of
change, that transformation would not have been
achieved. Today we enjoy economic, political and social
stability that we did not have before. That is why we
would like to reiterate our commitment to the women
and peace and security agenda.

We thank the Secretary-General for the
recommendations he presented today in the run-up to
the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). All
States, together with the United Nations system and civil
society, must work together in a coordinated fashion to
achieve optimal implementation of this agenda.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Ms. Michelle Miintefering,
Minister of State in the Federal Foreign Office
of Germany.

