Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I thank the Rwandan
presidency for convening this debate on such an
important issue for international peace and security.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his remarks
and his comprehensive report (S/2013/149) on sexual
violence in armed conflict. We are grateful to Special
Representative Bangura for her presentation and her
dedication to this cause. We would also like to express
our appreciation to the representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for her
statement.

The Security Council's engagement with the
issue of women and peace and security has greatly
contributed to our common efforts to improve the lives
of women in conflict situations around the world. The
resolutions adopted by the Council have not only created
a comprehensive body of norms and tools, but have also
stimulated discussion, self-criticism and progress on
the protection and promotion of women's rights.

Today we focus our attention on one of the most
appalling aspects of the women and peace and security
agenda: the problem of sexual violence in conflict. The
challenge when discussing this scourge is to translate
our sorrow and outrage into practical action capable of
bringing about real change. Only an integrated approach
that combines a sharper focus on prevention, the fight
against impunity and better support to victims can help
us fight sexual violence in conflict in an effective and
decisive manner.

Prevention is always the best remedy. It
involves, in the first place, strengthening national
capacities, addressing the needs of States in terms of
institution-building, training personnel, supporting
victims and promoting the rule of law. Developing
national awareness-raising activities and information
campaigns to break taboos and misperceptions around
the issue is also important.

Prevention also involves tackling the disturbing
relationship between the widespread availability of
illicit small arms and light weapons and conflict-
related sexual violence. We acknowledge the progress
achieved by the adoption of the landmark Arms Trade
Treaty, which establishes that conventional arms should
not be exported when they might be used to commit or
facilitate gender-based violence. We regret, however,
that it was not possible to include in the Treaty a clear
prohibition of transfers to unauthorized non-State
actors, as such a provision would greatly contribute to
the objective of preventing the commission of sexual
violence in conflict.

Peacekeeping operations are another important
pillar contributing to the prevention of conflict-related
sexual violence. Local populations and international
public opinion have high expectations concerning the
role of United Nations peacekeepers in preventing
sexual violence. In that regard, adequate training
remains key, not only to ensure that peacekeepers
acquire a proper understanding of how to address cases
of sexual violence, but also to enable them to apply
concrete prevention strategies.

That preventive role requires resources compatible
with the magnitude of the tasks involved. Brazil has
taken some meaningful steps. We have signed a letter
of intent with UN-Women to deepen our cooperation
regarding the training ofpeacekeepers on gender issues
and the promotion of South-South cooperation on
gender issues involving peacekeeping training centres
in Latin America and Africa. Furthermore, Brazil has
been involved in cooperation activities with a number
of countries emerging from conflict in areas related to
sexual violence. The Brazilian Cooperation Agency
has, for instance, been working with the United Nations
Population Fund in Haiti and Guinea-Bissau to build
institutional capacity to deal with victims of gender-
based violence in areas such as health, justice and
security.

As an important element in efforts to achieve
justice, the fight against impunity is essential as a
means to put an end to sexual violence in conflict. It
acts as a deterrent for perpetrators and contributes to
righting the wrongs done to victims. Brazil appreciates
the work that Ms. Bangura's Office carries out in
support of the strengthening of national capacities
aimed at bringing perpetrators to justice. The Security
Council can assist in fighting impunity by addressing
such violence in its subsidiary bodies as appropriate.
More discussion is needed, however, on the idea of
adopting targeted and gradual measures in contexts
where no sanctions regimes are in place, as that could
amount to applying restrictive measures in situations
that have not been determined by the Security Council
to constitute threats to international peace and security.

Dealing with sexual violence requires that we
act on many fronts simultaneously. Over the past few
years, the international community has made important
normative progress, which has allowed us to reframe
the issue of sexual violence in different terms. We must
now work more effectively to implement those norms.
Brazil is committed to this cause and is ready to work
in line with Security Council provisions with the goal
of effectively addressing sexual violence in conflict
situations in all its aspects.

