Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks Nigeria for holding this open debate
and the Secretary-General and Ms. Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for their statements.

One of the major challenges facing the international
community in this area is that of bringing perpetrators
to justice to put an end to the culture of impunity. In
addition to that, there is the serious problem that an
overwhelming majority of survivors never have access
to means of reparation and reintegration. Accountability
mechanisms, both nationally and internationally, are
therefore essential to address that problem. Mexico
emphasizes the relevance and usefulness of the
International Criminal Court and its complementary
power to investigate and prosecute those responsible
for international crimes, including war crimes and
sexual crimes, if a State is unable or unwilling to do so.

At the same time, we should not forget that sexual
violence in conflict is almost never reported as a result
of the risks facing both survivors and witnesses, which
complicates the creation of accurate records on the
incidence of that crime. We need closer cooperation
among States and greater coordination among United
Nations bodies to set up a joint international strategy
to combat the culture of impunity, enable the full
inclusion of women as key actors in peace processes
and ceasefires, and promote their participation in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
measures and in security sector reform.

Mexico acknowledges that the commission of
certain crimes is so serious that it transcends national
interests and affects the international community as
a whole; therefore, all States have an obligation to
investigate and punish such crimes with the two-fold
objective of ending impunity and preventing recurrence.
Our country actively participates in the actions and
efforts of the international community to prevent
international crimes. One example is our membership
in the Latin American Network for Genocide and Mass
Atrocity Prevention, which held a training seminar this
week in Mexico City on international mechanisms for
the prevention of mass atrocities, with the participation
of Government experts, international organizations and
members of civil society and academia.

Likewise, at the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly, Mexico endorsed the Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict and
agreed to serve as a regional promoter of the initiative
launched by the United Kingdom in 2013. As part of
those efforts, Mexico will host a regional seminar next
month that will bring together a multidisciplinary group
of experts and officials from the United Nations system
to gather input from experts from Latin America and the
Caribbean and to foster the exchange of best practices
in combating sexual violence in conflicts.

Mexico has also supported the development of
an international protocol on the documentation and
investigation of sexual violence in conflict, as a result
of the Declaration of Commitment, and it has appointed
an independent expert to assist in that process. We hope
that the protocol will become a new tool that facilitates
research aimed at prosecuting those responsible and
providing comprehensive care to victims.

Moreover, my country is also reviewing its legal
and institutional framework with a view to possibly
creating an action plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000). That process involves the relevant areas of
Government and systematizes some activities already
carried out nationally, such as capacity-building for
our armed forces in the human rights of women and in
gender equality.

While the international community now has a
comprehensive legal and institutional framework for
addressing sexual violence under consideration by
the Security Council, we must do much to continue to
strengthen and implement it.

