Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia would like
to express its appreciation to the Spanish presidency
of the Security Council for initiating this open debate
and providing an excellent concept note on the subject
(S/2015/749, annex). We also thank the Secretary-
General and the other briefers for their valuable
contributions yesterday.

The year 2015 has been a symbolic one for the
international community, starting as it did with the
celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action (Beijing+20),
followed in September by the General Assembly's
adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), in which gender
equality is embedded as a stand-alone development
goal, and now amplified by the marking of the fifteenth
anniversary of the resolution 1325 (2000). It is evident
that empowering women and promoting their active
participation in all spheres of public life are priorities
on the current international agenda.

Armenia has always been at the forefront of the
promotion and protection of women's rights. With
regard to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), we would like to emphasize the importance
of implementing confidence-building measures,
including people-to-people contacts. We should also
recognize the links between resolution 1325 (2000)
and other international instruments concerning gender
equality, such as the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
and the Beijing Platform and Plan of Action. This year,
Armenia has prepared and submitted to the relevant
bodies of the United Nations two important documents,
our national review for Beijing+20 and our fifth and
sixth joint periodic reports on CEDAW. They give a
detailed analysis of our country's implementation of its
commitments on gender equality and the empowerment
of women.

At the same time, and touching on the resolution's
comprehensive coverage of the issues, we should
stress that Armenia has already implemented or is in
the process of implementing many of its components
in the area of gender security, including through two
national action plans: a strategic action plan for the
period 2011-2015 to combat gender-based violence,
and an anti-trafficking plan, our fourth for the period
2013-2015.

As far as the international aspects of our national
plan are concerned, we have to face certain realities
and challenges on the ground. Twenty-one years after
the conclusion of the trilateral ceasefire agreement
that ended the active military phase of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict, the physical security and survival
of the people of Nagorno Karabakh is still under
threat. By the same token, the civilians residing in
Armenia's border territory have been systematically
and indiscriminately targeted by Azerbaijani armed
forces. Armenia strongly condemns these violations
of international humanitarian law and the tragedy that
occurred at the end of September, in which three women
in Armenian border settlements were killed.

Armenia has always advocated for
confidence-building measures relating to the situation
of women living across dividing lines, particularly
in areas of conflict. Unfortunately, we have not able
to exploit the great potential of such trust-building,
given the position of Azerbaijan on the issue. The
imprisonment of Azerbaijani peace and human rights
activists involved in international projects, including
Leyla Yunus, continues to be an insurmountable
impediment to full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Armenia remains committed to addressing
the issues of women and peace and security in line
with the aspirations of the people of Armenia and its
international obligations.

