Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate, which we believe is very timely.
We are pleased that the Security Council is once again
comprehensively addressing the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security.

At the outset, I should like to say that Spain

associates itself with the statement just made by the

representative of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union.

Despite the positive steps that have to be taken
towards the effective implementation of the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000), it seems to us that the
international community is moving ahead too slowly
when it comes to ensuring the participation of women
at all levels of peace processes and with regard to
ensuring effective protection for women and girls in
conflict situations. That is clear from the briefings
made this morning by various officials of the
Secretariat.

I should like to underscore that we are especially
concerned about ongoing grave violations of
international law - including international
humanitarian law and human rights law - perpetrated
against women and girls, including sexual exploitation
and the abuse to which they are subjected in situations
of armed conflict. That is something that many
speakers who have spoken before me have mentioned.

Resolution 1325 (2000) calls on States to make
efforts to implement the resolution at the national
level. Spain is committed to effective gender equality
as a priority of the Government. We have developed a
national action plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000) that focuses on the following basic goals.

First, it will strengthen the inclusion of a gender
perspective in all phases of our participation in peace
missions, from planning to conclusion, including the
reconstruction and peacebuilding processes. Secondly,
it will ensure that military and civilian police personnel
who participate in peace missions receive specific
training in matters of equality and in the various
aspects of resolution 1325 (2000). Thirdly, it will
guarantee women, adolescents and girls in areas of
conflict and post-conflict the full enjoyment of their
human rights, and encourage women's participation in
the negotiation and implementation of peace
agreements. Fourthly, it will promote as a cross-cutting
issue the principle of equal treatment of women and
men in the planning and execution of activities in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants and their families. Fifthly, it will
encourage awareness and the dissemination of
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the work of Spanish
civil society in regard to it.

In order to reach those goals, we have considered
actions not only at the national level, but also at the
heart of the regional structures to which Spain belongs,
such as the European Union, NATO and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and especially and most importantly within the
framework of our participation in the United Nations.
In that regard, we are striving to contribute to the
promotion of gender equality policies in general, and in
particular in relation to women's participation in peace
processes, from conflict prevention to peacebuilding.

At the national level, Spain is decisively
progressing towards the full integration of women into
its armed forces at the same level of opportunity and
well-being at work as men. In a very few years, we
have achieved second place in the European Union
with respect to the proportion of women in the armed
forces, through a decisive policy to make the military
attractive to women by promoting, among other
measures, the conciliation of work and family.

Spain understands peacebuilding as a broad
process in which development assistance is
fundamental. In that regard, Spanish official
development aid directed towards gender issues has
doubled from 2004 to 2007. In particular, we have
continued to work closely with the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women, providing Spanish cooperation funds for
peacebuilding, especially in Africa and Latin America.
Sector strategies for Spanish cooperation relating to
gender in the areas of development and peacebuilding
have also been approved, in which the promotion of
resolution 1325 (2000) is an immediate key priority. At
this very moment, a plan on women and peacebuilding
is being drafted for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), which will be directed towards all actors
of Spanish cooperation.

I do not wish to end my statement without
properly highlighting the important role that the
Peacebuilding Commission is being called upon to play
in issues of women, peace and security. We are
convinced of the need to integrate a gender perspective
into its work. That will surely result in better and more
fruitful developments in favour of peace throughout the
world. Spain is willing to work closely with the
Commission on that important issue and to continue
supporting the Peacebuilding Fund.

