Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having taken the
initiative to hold this debate today.

At the outset, I would like to say that my
country's thoughts are with Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi,
who has been prevented for far too long from playing
her rightful role in contributing to peace and
democratization in her country.

France fully associates itself with the statement to
be made later by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union.

We have been taking stock of the situation five
years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). I
will not go into too much detail, but I would like to
focus on three important elements.

The first relates to the raising of awareness of the
consequences and implications of conflict for women
today. The world has experienced the nightmare of
people being persecuted and massacred because they
belonged to a particular racial minority. Given the
geopolitical aspects of conflict today, we see that
women often suffer and become victims because they
are women.

Secondly, resolution 1325 (2000) has changed the
way in which the Council looks at the issue. Women
are victims, but they are also active participants in
settlement and reconstruction processes.

Thirdly, the daily work of the Council has
changed as a result of resolution 1325 (2000). Today,
the role of women is taken into account when we draw
up the mandates for peacekeeping operations, when we
listen to reports in the Council and when we elaborate
provisions and establish parameters. Of course, that is
not sufficient. We must continue, and, if possible,
speed up the process that has been in place since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Let me propose
several courses of action, to be taken simultaneously.

The first course of action involves national
strategies for implementing the resolution, and perhaps
a regional plan of action on the European Union model.
At the national level, France, for its part, just a few
years ago adopted a national charter of action on
equality. We intend, when we review that Charter in
2007, to include many more detailed provisions as a
result of resolution 1325 (2000).

As a second course of action, we must support the
Secretary-General's efforts to implement the resolution
throughout the United Nations system. We listened
with great interest to Ms. Mayanja, who shared with us
the action plan that she has drawn up, which we
support. Of course, that plan should followed up
regularly at all levels, including in the Security
Council.

Turning to the third course of action, the
Council's action, as I said earlier, evolves on a daily
basis; but this must become a reflex. This 1325 (2000)
reflex, if I can call it that, will be reflected in the
Council mission led by Mr. de La Sabliere to the Great
Lakes region, which will involve a systematic dialogue
with local non-governmental organizations that
represent women. Likewise, since we will be in an area
where there are a considerable number of peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council mission will focus in
particular on the question of sexual abuse in
peacekeeping operations.

The fourth course of action, which has been
touched on a by a number of previous speakers, is, of
course, to use the current institutional reform process
to advance the agenda set out by resolution 1325
(2000).

As others have done, I would make reference to
the Peacebuilding Commission and to the Human
Rights Council. We believe that the Council will have a
crucial role to play in ensuring dignity for women. In
our view, the fact that it can meet on an urgent basis
when required will be pivotal in addressing the specific
needs of women in the area of human rights.

I would mention in passing that the endorsement
by the September summit of the concept of
responsibility to protect is, to a certain extent, a major
development in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

I would conclude by saying that, like other
colleagues, I listened carefully to the statements made
by Mr. Guehenno, Ms. Mayanja, Ms. Heyzer, Ms.
Noori and Ms. Dandi. We also welcome the very
interesting exchange of views which we had with non-
governmental organizations during the Arria-formula
meeting the day before yesterday, on the initiative of
Denmark. I would like to thank all of them for their
important contributions. They all can count on France
to develop the "1325 reflex" in all forums in which we
participate - existing forums and forums to be set up
later.

