Mrs. Schroderus-Fox (Finland): Finland fully
aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union. Given the importance of our topic today, I want
to add some further remarks on the Secretary-General's
first-ever report on sexual violence (S/2009/362).

It is our firm conviction that we must all endorse
the application of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) to their fullest extent. Conflict situations remain
a severe threat to the lives of women and children as
conflicts develop without front lines and violence
erupts suddenly. Women and children, and sometimes
men, are raped and sexually abused during and in the
aftermath of armed conflicts.

A year ago, this Council took a major step
forward by condemning the use of rape and other forms
of sexual violence as a tactic of war in armed conflicts.
The Council highlighted the link between safeguarding
international peace and security and the struggle
against sexual violence. The international community
has begun to recognize the seriousness of this grave
challenge to peace and security. The real test lies in
translating resolution 1820 (2008) into working
practices on the ground.

Systematic rape in conflict leaves devastating
wounds on society for decades. It should be considered
a weapon of war and, as such, an integral part of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
Reintegration compensation should not be processed if
this tactic of war continues. This was one of the issues
stressed at the women's leadership conference
convened in Monrovia in March 2009 by the Presidents
of the Republics of Liberia and Finland.

It is of the utmost importance that the victims of
rape and sexual abuse have access to legal process and
2

that perpetrators be prosecuted and convicted. We must
end the impunity of perpetrators. As noted by the
Secretary-General in his report, the strict enforcement
of a policy of zero tolerance, both by national
authorities and by all international actors engaged in
humanitarian, crisis management and peacebuilding
activities, is essential. The international community
and the individual States concerned need to pursue
ways to ensure adequate protection, health care and
counselling for the victims.

We must also remember that women are not
merely victims in conflicts; they are active agents in
solving and ending conflicts and leading society
through the healing process. We cannot afford to ignore
their leadership, knowledge, capacities and
commitment.

Women should be involved in decision-making
processes at all levels. To make this a reality, more
women must be in high-level positions in decision-
making, both nationally and internationally.
Involvement in negotiation processes must be based on
true participation and the possibility of influencing
negotiations.

Opportunities for women's participation should
be a part of the earliest stages of planning and
preparing a peacekeeping mission. Furthermore, the
number of female civilian and military personnel in
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions
should be increased, especially in leadership positions.
Women's engagement in peacebuilding and
reconstruction through non-governmental organizations
should receive greater support.

We must urgently put into practice the
commitments of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). The Secretary-General's report gives valuable
recommendations for action. We must give hope to all
victims who suffer from these horrific crimes of war
and make sure that we efficiently prevent violence and
deliver justice.

