Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia obviously
welcomes Azerbaijan bringing the Council's focus
to the critical intersection between the rule of law,
transitional justice, and the women, peace and security
agenda.

I thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their determined
efforts, and Ms. Balipou for her inspiring struggle on
the front lines. I welcome Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, the new
Executive Director of UN Women. We look forward to
receiving regular briefings from her and other senior
United Nations officials on the gender dimensions of
conflict and across the thematic work on our agenda. It
is integral to our work that they regularly provide such
input.

Thirteen years ago, resolution 1325 (2000)
recognized the central role of women in the maintenance
of international peace and security. But as the Secretary-
General's report (8/2013/525) makes clear, while there

has been some progress, typically the linkages between
women's participation and the work of the Council are
not made. The consistent inclusion in mission mandates
ofwomen, peace and security objectives is fundamental
to addressing that. Indeed, if the Council is to remain
a responsive role model, it is critical that timely
and relevant information and analysis be provided
systematically by all United Nations actors deployed in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts. Australia
commends the adoption today of resolution 2122 (2013)
for clearly articulating that.

It has long been recognized that women's
engagement in conflict prevention and resolution
and peacebuilding efforts is more likely to lead to
sustainable peace and security. Of the over 2 million
refugees from Syria today, 78 per cent are women and
girls. Having fled the violence in Syria, they are now
attempting to navigate a tidal wave of threats, including
sexual violence, mass forced displacement, early and
forced marriage, forced pregnancies and exploitation.
Those circumstances must not prevent their vital
contribution to reconstructing a safe and functioning
Syrian society, and we must ensure that their leadership
is harnessed as part of the solution.

For countries emerging from conflict, peace
processes often lead to institutional reforms that
establish new political, economic and social orders.
Women's early participation in peace talks is critical
not only to their effectiveness, but to underpinning
women's longer-term empowerment. Formal peace
processes must reflect the reality that women are
already undertaking peace work in their communities
and serving as agents of change as part of efforts to
keep the fabric of conflict-affected societies together.

Local justice remains critical to the long-term
healing and reconciliation of communities, and affected
States must ensure accountability for conflict-related
crimes. But to be effective, that must include justice
for crimes of sexual violence. Fifteen years since the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
included sexual and gender-based offences as crimes
against humanity and war crimes, the inclusion of such
offences in transitional justice arrangements must be
mainstreamed. From prosecutions to truth commissions
to reparations programmes, effective transitional
justice mechanisms must incorporate the situation of
women.

Engaging women as leaders is critical to building
sustainable peace. We must identify and address
impediments that prevent women from participating
in decision-making. We commend Mary Robinson's
appointment as Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region
and her long overdue approach to consulting early with
women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
support the United Nations ongoing dialogue with
women's civil society organizations as a barometer
of progress and a critical source of knowledge on the
effectiveness of missions.
In post-conflict settings, women's full and effective
participation is fundamental to efforts to rebuild the
justice sector and to security sector reform. In Solomon
Islands, Australia supported, through the Participating
Police Force, the post-conflict recruitment and
retention of female officers to the local police force.
The early involvement of women and the integration of
a gender-perspective led directly to the establishment
of critical domestic violence and sexual abuse services.
Also, more fundamentally, it underwrote the broader
processes of community rebuilding.

Of course, ensuring women and girls' safety and
security in conflict is instrumental to laying the ground
for gender equality initiatives. We look forward to the
contribution that the implementation of the Arms Trade
Treaty can make to reducing gender-based Violence
in conflict settings, and we strongly encourage its
ratification.

To conclude, the high-level review ofresolution 1325
(2000) in 2015 will provide a necessary opportunity to
take stock of our successes and to address the ongoing
gaps in implementing our agenda. The Council's
dedicated field mission ahead of that will be important
in providing us with direct insights to help inform
those discussions. But of course, for women in conflict
situations, our review of the effective implementation
of the women, peace and security agenda cannot wait.
We must continue, across the whole breadth of the
Council's work, to rigorously strengthen the Council's
consideration of the gender dimensions of conflict.

