Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
year marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). It is highly
significant for the Council to hold this open debate on
sexual violence in armed conflict.

China condemns all acts of violence against
women in armed conflict, including sexual violence. It
urges parties to conflicts to comply with international
humanitarian and human rights law.

We call on the relevant national Governments to
investigate crimes and bring to justice the perpetrators
of crimes against women in armed conflict. We urge
the States that have not yet done so to accede to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women as soon as possible.

To protect women from sexual violence in armed
conflict, there is much that the international
community can do. In that connection, I wish to
emphasize the following four points.

First, the protection of women from sexual
violence needs to be tackled at its source. Only when
armed conflict is effectively prevented can there be
real protection for women and their rights and
interests. In that context, the international community
should be committed to preventive diplomacy to settle
disputes through dialogue, consultation and other
peaceful means.

Secondly, national Governments bear the primary
responsibility for combating crimes of sexual violence.
The international community should focus on
providing affected countries with assistance, seek their
understanding and cooperation, help strengthen their
capacity-building, make progress in security sector
reform and improve mechanisms in the areas of the
rule oflaw, judicial assistance and compensation.

Thirdly, in addressing issues relating to women
and peace and security, there is a need for various
United Nations bodies and agencies to operate with a
synergetic division of labour, in accordance with their
respective mandates.

The Council needs to pay close attention to
situations that pose threats to international peace and
security and to make full use of existing mechanisms,
such as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and UN Women, to create synergy.

Fourthly, China supports resolution 1960 (2010),
which was just adopted. We hope that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Margot
Wallstrom, will perform her responsibilities strictly in
line with the mandate formulated by the Council to
play a constructive role in addressing sexual violence
in armed conflict.

