Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The countries of
Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia - and the associated countries,
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the EFTA country
of the European Economic Area, Iceland, align
themselves with this statement.

We appreciate that this important issue is once
again on the agenda of the Security Council.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is a landmark resolution
very much welcomed by the European Union. It has
contributed significantly to the systematic inclusion of
certain agenda issues in the consideration of conflict
and peace efforts by the United Nations system. A solid
momentum has been created, but more has to be done
in order to implement the recommendations of the
resolution. In this respect we look forward to the action
plan on implementation foreseen by the Secretary-
General in his report on the prevention of armed
conflict of June 2001 (S/2001/574).

The European Union shall refrain from reiterating
well-known positions on today's theme. We welcome,
however, the opportunity to participate in the process
of developing this new and important area by offering a
few specific recommendations with regard to conflict,
peacekeeping and gender.

The first suggestion that I would like to make is a
revision of the existing guidelines and standard
operating procedures. The Strategic Manual on
Multidimensional Peacekeeping should include a
chapter on gender mainstreaming. In addition, tools
and mechanisms to mainstream gender in all aspects of
peace operations should be developed. Proper standard
operating procedures on gender should be prepared in
order to support systematic implementation and
monitoring of progress. In addition, it is our View that
all United Nations-mandated military operations should
operate in accordance with the Secretary-General's
bulletin on observance by United Nations forces of
international humanitarian law.

The second suggestion relates to organization and
training. We have noted that gender offices have been
established in three field missions and that they have
achieved good results. We recommend that gender
offices or focal points be established in all missions
and that they be provided with the necessary support.
In addition, proper training packages for all civilian,
police and military personnel at all levels should be
developed.

In the opinion of the European Union we should
spare no effort to increase the participation of women
at decision-making levels in conflict resolution and
peace processes. The European Union is concerned
about the limited number of women appointed as
Special Representatives or Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General to peace missions. Member States
and the Secretary-General should more efficiently
promote the appointment of female candidates to these
positions.

The European Union believes that there should be
a focal point on gender issues in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in order to improve
mainstreaming of gender issues in the entire work of
the Department and to backstop the gender offices or
focal points in the field missions. In addition, we
believe that an increase in the number of women at
decision-making levels in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Political Affairs would be supportive to the
advancement of gender issues in relation to peace
processes.

Women are not just victims in armed conflicts.
They can be combatants, prisoners, leaders,
negotiators, peacemakers and peacekeepers, as well as
activists. Women have the potential to play a more
important role in the peacemaking and peace-building
processes. There should, however, be a more
systematic approach to gender mainstreaming with
regard to peacemaking and peace-building.

We should, therefore, recommend that a gender
perspective be integrated into any mandate and peace
plan, as this will enhance the possibility of success. In
this respect, allow me, Mr. President, to refer to the
very constructive ideas on the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
forwarded to the Council by Ms. Carolyn McAskie,
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, during last
week's open meeting on the Mano River. It is obvious
that inclusion of such elements in mandates requires
that gender experts contribute to all stages of the
planning of peace operations, including mission
planning and staffing.

Furthermore, it would indeed also be important to
develop some practical guidelines based on lessons
learned on how to include community level and non-
governmental organizations in peacemaking, especially
women's groups. These guidelines should also address
how the full and active participation of women in the
reconstruction of society and in institution-building
could take place in practical terms.

As mentioned by the representative of Chile, the
European Union and the Latin American countries are
right now are in the process of planning a conference
on women in peace operations. The conference is to
take place in Chile this coming fall and aims at raising
general awareness on gender dimensions in peace
processes in the European Union and in the Latin
American countries and at supporting the exchange of
knowledge and experience on national and regional
capacity-building with regard to international peace
operations.

The European Union puts great emphasis on the
issue of conflict, peacekeeping and gender, and we will
continue to pursue our supporting policies in this
regard. I hope that the practical proposals that I have
offered today will help develop the Secretary-General's
study in a way that will allow it to provide concrete
recommendations on the way forward.

