Ms. Anderson (Ireland): We appreciate very
much that this debate on conflict-related sexual
violence is taking place during Togo's presidency of
the Security Council. We commend the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2012/33). It is compelling in
its range, clarity and detail. The litany of crimes to
which it bears witness is shameful.

The challenge is to ensure that our outrage
translates into determined and purposeful action,
yielding early and measurable results. Before
commenting further on the Secretary-General's report,
I would wish to note actions undertaken by my
Government in the past few months.

Our Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
addressed the Security Council two weeks ago (see S/PV.6715) in his capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). In his statement, he made clear that
the issue of women and peace and security will receive
strong emphasis throughout Ireland's chairing of the
Organization. A new Special Representative of the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office on Gender Issues,
Ms. June Zeitlin, has been appointed. Ireland is also
providing a dedicated military officer, based at our
Permanent Mission to the OSCE in Vienna, to examine
ways in which the OSCE can support the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions.

Ireland has also wished to demonstrate at the
national level its strong continuing support for the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. As a concrete
demonstration of that support, we have made a
financial contribution to the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Aware
that the Team of Experts relies upon extrabudgetary
resources, we were pleased to be able to contribute
$135,000 at the end of last year.

The report before us is testament to the need for a
dedicated Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, with the strong mandate which the Special
Representative holds. These are crimes surrounded by
taboos and silence, consistently underreported and,
even when they are reported, unlikely to be followed
up. If there is to be any chance of penetrating the
darkness, we need a strong and unwavering
searchlight. The independent voice and exclusive focus
of the Special Representative helps to shine that steady
light. The latest report from the Secretary-General
validates both the appointment of a dedicated Special
Representative and the clarity and scope of her
mandate.

The report addresses a range of specific situations
spanning four continents, all of them deserving our
attention. In some of these situations, conflict still
rages; others are post-conflict but still dealing with a
poisonous legacy. Cote d'Ivoire, Libya and South
Sudan are among the more recent ugly chapters. The
sexual violence being unleashed in Syria, with male
detainees as particular targets, deserves our
unequivocal condemnation.

Given the time constraints and the breadth of
coverage in earlier interventions, I will limit myself to
commenting on three points, illustrated by three case
studies.

The first is a case study on ending impunity. We
all recognize the simple equation: impunity for
perpetrators of sexual violence guarantees that the
virus will spread; conversely, ending impunity and
making the perpetrators pay will act as a deterrent.

The first step in ending impunity is the systematic
gathering of credible evidence. The Secretary-
General's report gives a sense of the progress being
made in that regard. For the first time in a report of this
nature, the Secretary-General has named individuals on
the basis of credible reports of culpability.

In the commentary on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for example, one finds the names of 10
or so individuals. That specificity of data will enable us
to measure outcomes. When we next come back to this
issue, it will be important to focus on precisely what
has happened in those cases. What steps have the
national authorities taken? What have we at the United
Nations been able, or willing, to do?

The possibility of measuring outcomes will apply
not just in the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, but also in relation to the list of parties set out
in annex 1 to the Secretary-General's report.

The report includes clear recommendations to the
Security Council on increasing pressure on perpetrators
of conflict-related sexual violence. We look to the
Council to show determination in its response. Too
many recent headlines from the Security Council have
been ones of disunity. On the issue of sexual violence
in conflict, the Council has the opportunity to assert
itself, to demonstrate that disunity does not define it,
and to act decisively to sanction perpetrators, to refer
cases to the International Criminal Court, to mandate
commissions of inquiry and to condemn violations
explicitly in resolutions and statements.

My second point is that women are not a
footnote; and Somalia is a case study in that regard.
The Secretary-General's report sets out the scale of
sexual violence in Somalia: the crimes of Al-Shabaab;
the groups of men in military uniform who prey on
women and girls in internally displaced camps in
Mogadishu; the rapes and gang-rapes in camps in
Kenya; and the chronic and largely unaddressed sexual
violence in Puntland.

The Conference on Somalia is meeting in London
today, and we look forward to a substantive outcome. It
is worthwhile, however, to mention an initiative of
women ambassadors accredited to the African Union.
The cross-regional group of women ambassadors - I
might mention that the Ambassadors of Togo and
Ireland were part of that group - were concerned that
initial preparatory papers for the London Conference
lacked any focus on the situation of women in Somalia,
despite the gravity of their situation and the shared
principles of resolution 1325 (2000).
With African Union (AU) and United Nations
support, the group undertook meetings with Somali
women both in Nairobi and in camps of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in

the Ethiopian border region. The statement from the
women ambassadors, produced yesterday, is intended
as an input to the London Conference. It outlines issues
of concern and concludes with the urging of Somali
women that the international community raise issues of
gender, including with Somali leaders.

Amid the range and gravity of the problems
facing Somalia, and the imperative to advance on the
political and security fronts, it is easy to see how
specific issues predominantly affecting women may
not be prioritized, or may be seen as symptomatic of
deeper problems that, if addressed, will help to
alleviate the situation of women. But the phenomenon
of women as a footnote has been with us far too long.
When the international community comes together in a
high-profile conference, one would hope to see from
the outset a strong consciousness of the gender
dimension of the conflict. The time has well passed
when sexual violence could be viewed as in some sense
collateral damage - a regrettable but inevitable by-
product of larger forces at work.

My third point pertains to the responsibilities of
United Nations peacekeepers, and Chad is the case
study. The Secretary-General's report sets out steps
being taken to improve the training of peacekeepers
with regard to conflict-related sexual violence. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UN-Women collaboration in that regard is particularly
welcome. The standards for United Nations
peacekeepers must be the highest. The Blue Helmet is
designed to inspire confidence and trust; it is
unthinkable that in any circumstance it should instil
fear of rape or sexual violence.

Recognizing that progress is being made, it is still
salutary to hear directly from those with first-hand
experience. In Ireland's case, we had an instructive
recent experience of peacekeeping in Chad. Ireland had
overall command of the European Union military
operation in the Republic of Chad and in the Central
African Republic (EUFOR), and deployed more than
400 Irish troops. Subsequently, when EUFOR was
replaced by United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), our troops
continued to serve in the same numbers with the
Mission until 2010.
The transition from EUFOR to MINURCAT
afforded us the opportunity to witness differences in
approach between the two peacekeeping models. One
of the areas where there was a measurable difference
was in relation to the gender focus. Mission
requirements relating to resolution 1325 (2000) were
more specific and detailed during the EUFOR
deployment than during the subsequent MINURCAT
deployment.

That was a specific experience at a specific time,
and may not be fully representative of today's
circumstances. Yet the Chad experience left a strong
imprint on our peacekeepers and an awareness of the
challenge confronting the United Nations in that
regard. Seeing the practical outcomes of gender work
with EUFOR also further strengthened the commitment
to training Irish peacekeepers on gender issues. A
number of steps have been taken. I might mention that,
as of May, our defence forces will deploy a gender
adviser and gender focal points in the unit deploying to
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

The report before us makes for difficult reading,
but it also lays down a challenge. We can no longer
claim ignorance of what is happening, or the scale of
what is happening; nor can we claim a lack of credible
evidence as a rationale for inaction.

The Special Representative, fully backed by the
Secretary-General, is pursuing her mandate in her
characteristic vigorous and clear-sighted way. It is for
all of us - in the Security Council, in the General
Assembly and across the United Nations system - to
take on our share of responsibility.

