Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): We join other delegations
in congratulating your country, Mr. President, on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, and we extend our gratitude to you, Sir, for
convening this important debate. Today's deliberations
reaffirms the great importance that we, individually
and collectively, attach to the promotion and protection
of the rights of women and their role in the prevention
of conflict.

As the year 2013 marks the thirteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, it is of the utmost importance that
we strive to ensure gender equality, to address violence
against women and to enhance women's participation in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts. We therefore
welcome the Council's continued recognition ofthe need
for more systematic attention to the implementation
of women and peace and security commitments in its
work.
As the report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2013/525)
indicates, we welcome the progress that has been made
since 2012 in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and the operationalization of the accountability
framework provided by the Council's resolutions on
women and peace and security. In that regard, we
take note of the efforts and measures undertaken by
Member States, United Nations entities and regional
organizations.

However, we remain gravely concerned that, despite
the existence ofresolution 1325 (2000), which became a
beacon of hope for millions of women and young girls,
crimes of rape and sexual Violence still persist. Women
and girls continue to be targeted, while rape and sexual
violence continue to be used as weapons of war. The
prevention of sexual violence in armed conflict is
therefore both a matter of upholding universal human
rights and of maintaining international security, in
keeping with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

In that connection, impunity for sexual violence
by armed groups is unacceptable and can never
be tolerated. My delegation wishes to stress the
responsibility of States to protect their own populations
and the importance of demonstrating commitment and
political will to prevent sexual violence. To that end,
I wish to emphasize the importance of respect for the
rule of law, accountability and access to justice, as we
believe that they are critical to protecting women's rights
in the aftermath of conflict. Botswana also shares the
view expressed by many that gender-sensitive legal and
institutional reform, in conformity with international
standards, should be accorded priority in order to stem
violence against women. With the belief and a sense of
optimism that, given our collective will, especially in
the Security Council, we can bring an end to impunity
and to those crimes, we call on the Council to strengthen
its efforts in that regard.

While greater attention continues to be paid to the
prosecution of perpetrators of these crimes, we are
also of the View that more must be done to ensure that
transitional justice addresses the full range of conflict-
related violation of women's rights. My delegation also
believes that efforts to address sexual violence in armed
conflict should be consistent with and complementary
to wider efforts to promote the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and other relevant resolutions
on women and peace and security.

Let me also highlight that greater coordination and
collaboration with other relevant stakeholders and the
provision of assistance to States in conflict and post-
conflict situations are Vital to improving global efforts
to address women, peace and security challenges.

Recognizing that peace is inextricably linked with
equality between women and men, one of the most
important issues to be addressed remains women's
participation in conflict resolution, including the
negotiation of peace agreements at the national and
international levels. In that respect, it is also our belief
that the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
can be achieved only through increased recognition of
the crucial role of women, as well as their participation
and involvement in all efforts aimed at the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. We therefore fully share
the opinion that gender equality should be recognized
as a core issue in the maintenance of peace and
security. We also support calls for the inclusion of a
gender perspective in mediation and peace processes,
particularly in the context of security arrangements and
transitional justice mechanisms.

Ending violations of women's human rights is a
moral imperative and one to whose achievement we
must collectively commit. In that regard, Botswana
strongly supports all efforts aimed at preventing and
eliminating all forms of Violence against women and
children. To that end, we wish to reiterate our support
for the work of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. In line with the Security Council's
intention expressed in 2010, Botswana looks forward to
the convening of the high-level review in 2015 to assess
progress in the implementation of its resolution 1325
(2000). We therefore welcome this morning's adoption
by the Council of resolution 2122 (2013).

