Ms. Kang: On behalf of Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, I have the honour to
deliver the following statement.

It has been more than 15 years since the Security
Council broke new ground by recognizing the protection
of civilians as central to its mandate. Since then, the
Council has taken important steps to implement its
commitments to protect civilians. The Council has
increasingly identified protection of civilians as a
priority task in many of the peacekeeping operations
it has created. The Secretary-General has launched
the Human Rights Up Front initiative to reinvigorate
system-wide coherence and commitment to preventing
and responding to serious human rights violations that
could lead to mass atrocities. Humanitarian actors have
also strengthened their policies and programmes to
protect civilians in crises, as exemplified in the 2013
Inter-Agency Standing Committee statement on the
centrality of protection.

Despite these positive developments across the
United Nations system, the task of protecting civilians
in armed conflict has become more and more onerous
over the years as the scale and level of brutality and
violence committed against civilians in armed conflict
have continued to rise. From Syria, Iraq, Yemen and
Libya to the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, South Sudan, the
Sudan, Ukraine and many others, civilians caught up
in armed conflict are being killed and maimed, fleeing
their homes and fearing for their lives. Now more than
ever, the protection of civilians needs to be at the top of
our priorities.

The need for protection has increased dramatically
in recent years, mainly as a result of armed conflict.
At the start of 2014, humanitarian organizations
appealed for aid to help 52 million people in urgent
need of assistance and protection. By the end of the
year, the number had gone up by almost 50 per cent to
76 million. The overwhelming majority of these people
are civilians affected by conflict, and the majority are
women and girls.

The number of people displaced by conflict has
reached levels not seen since the Second World War. At
the end of 2013, there were more than 33 million people
living in internal displacement caused by conflict
and violence. The majority have been displaced for
several years or even decades. The average length of
displacement is now 17 years. Of course, one of the
worst examples of this is in Syria, where more than half
of the population is currently displaced - 7.6 million
internally, some repeatedly, and 3.8 million as refugees
in neighbouring countries. But the number is growing
elsewhere, too - for example in Darfur, where 450,000
people were displaced last year, adding to the more
than 2 million already in internally displaced persons
camps.

Another area of serious concern is the widespread
use of explosive weapons in populated areas. Figures
from 2013 show that when explosive weapons were
used in populated areas, 93 per cent of the casualties
were civilians. The Secretary-General's call to avoid
the use of some explosive weapons in populated areas
has obviously remained unheeded.

The Security Council has taken concrete action
in a number of cases to implement its commitments
to protecting civilians in armed conflict, and it has
recognized the particular protection needs of women
and girls. In 2010, the Council adopted resolution 1960
(2010), which requested the Secretary-General to set
up monitoring and reporting arrangements on conflict-
related sexual violence, and called upon parties to
conflict to make clear commitments to combatting
sexual violence. Resolution 2122 (2013) put in place
stronger measures to enable women to participate
in conflict resolution and recovery. In addition, the
Council has adopted sanctions expressly targeting
perpetrators of sexual violence in various conflicts
around the world.

But the scourge of sexual violence in armed conflict
is far from being rooted out. Indeed, in most conflicts,
women and girls continue to be disproportionately
affected by sexual violence, and the brutalization of
women remains a consistent and persistent feature of
conflict. For example, as it has captured territory in
Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) has used and punished women to demonstrate its
power. Women have been repeatedly raped, forced into
marriage and sold into slavery. Nigerian women and girls
have given harrowing accounts of their experiences at
the hands of Boko Haram. In Afghanistan, the number
of women and girls killed or injured - including
through targeted attacks against women in public roles
and against girls seeking education - has continued to
increase at an alarming rate.

Women and children must also face the increased
vulnerability brought about by displacement, family
separation, the destruction of civilian infrastructure and
restrictions on humanitarian aid. Women and children
make up some 80 per cent of refugees around the world
and the majority of internally displaced persons. Women
and girls who are displaced are particularly at risk of
being targeted for all forms of gender-based Violence.
Harmful practices, such as forced and early marriage,
as well as survival sex, are also more common during
displacement.

Simply put, crisis exacerbates gender inequalities.
While entire communities suffer the impact of armed
conflict, women and girls are often the first to lose their
rights to education, to political participation and to
livelihoods, among other rights being bluntly violated.
These are manifestations of deeper, systemic problems.
We need to better understand the social, economic and
power dynamics that result in the continued enslavement
of and use of violence against women, particularly in
conflict situations. We must also make concerted efforts
to expand women's representation and participation
in rule-of-law processes and protection mechanisms.
Women must be included in the political leadership,
security forces and accountability mechanisms of
countries.

To facilitate these efforts on the ground,
17 women protection advisers have been deployed to
six peacekeeping operations and embedded in the
offices of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
Generals. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
regularly consults displaced women in the protection
of civilians sites through consultation groups that have
been formed. These consultations help to ensure that
prevention and protection strategies led by the Mission
take into account the perceptions and security needs
of women. Such good practices are being replicated in
other mission and non-mission settings.

The primary responsibility for protecting and
assisting civilians affected by armed conflict lies
with the parties to the conflict. Yet many parties have
demonstrated complete disregard for their obligations
under international humanitarian law and human rights
law. In some cases, parties to conflict deliberately
target civilians and use tactics designed to cause them
the greatest possible harm. In Nigeria, Boko Haram
has massacred hundreds of civilians and destroyed
thousands of homes, schools and medical clinics during
the past few weeks. This follows repeated incidents
of kidnapping of hundreds of women and children. In
Syria and Iraq, all parties have been targeting civilians
based on ethnic and religious grounds.

Parties to conflict are also denying people access
to basic assistance such as food and medicines. For
example, in Syria, the routine removal of medical
supplies and equipment from humanitarian convoys has
prevented critical medical aid from reaching those who
desperately need it. Violence, insecurity and movement
restrictions have further hindered access to medical
care, including reproductive health care for women and
girls. It is estimated that nearly 1,500 women give birth
in dire conditions each day in Syria, and that access
to obstetric and neonatal care is virtually non-existent
in some ISIL-controlled areas in Iraq, such as Anbar
province. Even siege is being used as a tactic ofwarfare
in Syria, where some 212,000 people are in areas that
are totally blocked off. They cannot get out and we
cannot get the required aid in.

International law is clear: parties to conflict are
responsible for meeting the basic needs of persons
under their control. Consent for relief operations must
never be withheld on arbitrary grounds. If parties are
unable or unwilling to provide adequate assistance, they
should allow and facilitate rapid, safe and unimpeded
access to people in need, including the immediate free
passage of medical supplies. Yet, time and again, we
see parties to conflict violating those basic obligations
with impunity, with grave consequences for civilians.

Parties to conflict must be pressed to do more
to comply with their legal obligations and ensure
accountability whenever such obligations are violated.
But the responsibility does not lie solely with the parties
themselves. The Security Council and the international
community must take steps to tackle the impunity
that continues to fuel many conflicts, as well as the
endless flow of weapons and arms. There is nothing
that emboldens violators more than knowing that they
will not be brought to account for the crimes they have
committed.

We also need to build up our collective capacity to
find political solutions to conflicts at an early stage,
rather than struggling to cope with the consequences.
The efforts of humanitarian workers and peacekeepers
are no substitute for timely and resolute political action
to prevent and resolve conflict. And women must be
full participants in the process. On the ground, we need
to be more attuned to the specific threats that civilians
are facing and the risk of escalation of violence and
violations, often manifested through heightened
discrimination and repression of minorities, including
women and girls. When we see early warning signs, we
must be able to act quickly and effectively. That is at
the core of the Secretary-General's Human Rights Up
Front initiative.

