Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I ampleased
to express my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening
today's important debate. We thank Ms., Mohammed,
Deputy Secretary-General, for her important
statement this morning, as well as Ms. Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual violence in Conflict, and Ms. Razia Sultana,
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for their briefings today.

Today's meeting is an important opportunity to
renew our commitment as the international community
to addressing crimes of sexual violence and supporting
States that face challenges in conflict and post-conflict
settings, as well as to follow up on the measures taken
by the Security Council since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, in order
to end such heinous crimes.

We cannot deal with the issue of women and peace
and security without addressing the suffering inflicted
on women and their vulnerability in conflict situations,
or without meaningful, coordinated efforts to protect
women and girls. To achieve that, national and
international legislation must be implemented, without
discrimination, to ensure the judicial prosecution of
criminals who commit crimes related to sexual violence.

The State of Qatar has spared no effort in tackling
the tremendous challenge of providing the necessary
support for promoting and protecting women's rights,
empowering women economically, socially and
politically and working towards the achievement of
gender equality. That would contribute to the fight
against sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations, in line with resolution 2106 (2013).

We are aware of the existing link between
trafficking, sexual violence, terrorism and the
transnational organized crime, as stated in Security
Council resolution. Consequently, the State of Qatar
has taken all the necessary legislative and executive
actions to deal with this issue, and we have intensified
cooperation and coordination internationally to
that end.

Based on our position on the need to address the
root causes of conflict that trigger sexual violence as a
result of poverty and unemployment leading to violent
extremism, terrorism and conflict, the State of Qatar
pays great attention to supporting States and regions
that suffer from poverty and face conflicts. That is done
through our foreign development and humanitarian aid
programme, which contributes nearly $2 billion annually
to address such issues. Furthermore, in September 2017,
we concluded a memorandum of understanding with
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Silatech Institution in the State of Qatar with a View to
boosting youth capacity in Arab and Islamic countries,
providing rehabilitation and launching projects to
protect youth from violent extremism.

Sexual Violence is used as a tool of war and terror
in various regions. We are deeply alarmed by those
practices being used against women in Syria, where
they suffer as a result of forced marriage, sexual
slavery, rape and torture. The State of Qatar expresses
its deep concern over those inhumane practices
against the brotherly Syrian people, in the absence
of accountability pertaining to grave violations to
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in Syria

Given the gravity of these crimes, which are
tantamount to war crimes and crimes against humanity,
the State of Qatar renews its commitment to support the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, established by the General
Assembly. It includes specialized experts in the field of
sexual violence.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his efforts
in fighting sexual exploitation and abuse in the United
Nations system. That has led to the voluntary agreement
to end sexual exploitation and abuse. The State of Qatar
signed the agreement as an important step towards
achieving the desired goal of ending sexual exploitation
and abuse in the United Nations system. I renew the call
of State of Qatar for strengthening the rule of law.

