Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Let me, first of
all acknowledge your country's leadership, Sir, in
convening this open debate on women and peace and
security, with special emphasis on sexual violence in
conflict zones. Solomon Islands is contributing to the
debate as a country emerging from conflict. While
stamping out sexual violence from any conflict is our
global responsibility, the primary responsibility, as
rightly pointed out by the Secretary-General, rests with
States. Solomon Islands continues to tackle the issue
of sexual violence in the context of its gender-based
violence national framework.

Solomon Islands is a culturally diverse country of
more than halfa million people who speak 87 different
languages. We have also established the Ministry of
National Unity, Reconciliation and Peace, as well as
the Ministry of Women, Youth and Children's Affairs.

As Council members may be aware, Solomon
Islands continues to work in partnership with the
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands
(RAMSI), which is led by Australia, one of the sitting
members of the Council. The Regional Assistance
Mission is also supported by New Zealand and all of the
neighbouring Pacific small island developing States.
The Regional Assistance Mission is provided for under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. My
country extends its sincere gratitude to all its Pacific
neighbours.

The success of the Solomon Islands/RAMSI
partnership in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
peacemaking speaks for itself. My country's economy
has been growing over the years. After 10 years
of operations, the Regional Assistance Mission is
undergoing a transitional phase. The military component
will be withdrawing from the country, while the police
and civilian components will remain.

The Solomon Islands Police Force has a new look,
thanks to special outreach efforts to women in terms of
recruitment. Today, the acting head of our Police Force
is a woman, a first for Solomon Islands. It is a small step,
but an important one. Even more, it is fulfilling one of
the six goals of UN-Women, that is,k strengthening the
leadership of women in peace and security.

That also speaks of the rich experience that the
women of my country have gained during the height of
our ethnic conflict. They appealed for peace, as women
in parts of the country suffered from sexual violence.

We just completed the fifty-seventh session of the
Commission on the Status of Women last month, whose
agreed conclusions speak of how violent the world has
become. Seven out of 10 women suffer from gender
violence. Sexual violence, unfortunately, has gone viral.
Two out of three women in Solomon Islands suffer from
gender-based violence. Solomon Islands has responded
by establishing a specific policy on the elimination of
gender violence as a subsidiary of our gender equality
and women's development policy.

The elimination of gender-based violence is a
shared responsibility. We are tackling the issues,
working with all stakeholders to address the issue of
rape and sexual violence with a strong campaign to
prevent it, protect victims and deal with perpetrators.
Solomon Islands has institutionalized Government-
wide structures to deal with the issue nationally,
working with all the relevant stakeholders. We have
in place a national steering committee to monitor the
progress in the implementation of the policy, which
reports to the national task force.

Solomon Islands is also a member of the g7+
countries promoting the New Deal agreed to in Busan.
We hope that that framework will address the root
causes of conflicts.

Let me conclude by highlighting one of the
challenges facing our world today, namely, climate
change. Climate change cuts across all three pillars of
the multilateral system and is serving to disempower
women, especially as land is being swallowed up by the
rise in sea-levels. To date, the Organization's response to
disaster-risk management has been directed to sudden-
onset events, rather than to the slow-onset events such
as climate change. We hope to see a change of approach
in that area. Finally, Solomon Islands would like to
say that we join others in condemning sexual violence,
wherever it may occur.

