Mr. Begec (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate France on its assumption ofthe presidency
of the Security Council. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their highly informative statements.

Today, the severe effects of conflicts in various
geographical areas on women and girls continue to
constitute a significant problem that must be thoroughly
examined by the international community. We consider
resolution 1325 (2000) to be an important milestone in
terms of addressing the disproportionate and unique
impact of armed conflict on women. The international
community should pay particular attention to how to
prevent and respond to sexual violence, which is often
used as a weapon of war and a strategy to deprive human
beings of their most basic rights: their safety, security
and dignity. These crimes should not go unrecorded
and unpunished.

The horrific acts perpetrated against women and
girls by terrorist organizations such as Da'esh and Boko
Haram require a comprehensive and inclusive approach
in order to eliminate the root causes of the problem.
This approach should include women's equal and full
participation, as active agents, in the prevention and
resolution ofconflicts, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
Furthermore, all actors should take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual abuse, in
situations of armed conflict.

On this understanding, Turkey actively promotes
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
succeeding resolutions in international forums,
including in the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and NATO.
Deliberations and efforts are also under way aimed at
drafting a national action plan for the implementation
of the resolution.

The focus of today's open debate is timely and
pertinent. We are witnessing new complexities
surrounding the changing nature of conflicts. An
increasing number of intra-State conflicts, protracted
crises, forced displacements and humanitarian
emergencies unfortunately create an environment
conducive to the trafficking of women and girls.

Turkey attaches great importance to the fight
against human trafficking, which constitutes a
violation of human rights and an offence to the dignity
and integrity of the human being. Owing to its unique
geographical location bridging two continents and with
a fast-developing economy, Turkey has lately become a
destination country in human trafficking.

In order to reverse this trend, we have introduced
numerous administrative and legal measures regarding
the main pillars of combating human trafficking:
prevention, protection, prosecution and cooperation.
Turkey is a party to the relevant international legal
instruments to combat human trafficking. The
necessary amendments have been made in order to align
its domestic legislation with international instruments.

We believe that efforts aimed at providing support
to victims of human trafficking are essential. On this
understanding, Turkey is providing two main categories
of support to victims of human trafficking. The first
one is its victim support programme, and the second
is its voluntary and safe return programme. Victims
of human trafficking can benefit from the support
services provided in Turkey upon their consent or can
return to their home countries if they choose to do so,
on a voluntary basis.

Turkey has also opened women's shelters in
various cities in cooperation with the International
Organization for Migration and has put into service a
helpline for victims of human trafficking.

We are of the opinion that human trafficking cannot
be prevented by Governments acting individually.
In order to combat human trafficking, a well-
designed, coordinated and comprehensive response
and international cooperation are required. In this
context, acceding to international instruments and
their implementation in a good spirit of cooperation and
goodwill, using pragmatic approaches rather than strict
formality, are essential for success.

Turkey supports the empowerment and well-being
of women and girls in various emergency, conflict or
post-conflict situations through its comprehensive
development assistance programmes. The projects
we are carrying out in Afghanistan and Somalia,
in particular in the fields of education and health-
care services, are concrete examples of our efforts to
this end.

As the crisis in Syria enters its sixth year, millions
of Syrians, including women and girls, continue to live
under the threat of sexual violence. Turkey is making
every effort to provide security and safety to Syrian
women and girls who have fled the conflict in Syria.

I take this opportunity to mention some of the
best practices we have implemented to tackle forms
of sexual violence relevant to our debate, based on our
experience in responding to forced displacements in
our region.

Between 2013 and 2015, a humanitarian aid
programme for eliminating and responding to gender-
based violence for Syrian women and girls was
conducted by the Turkish Ministry of Family and
Social Policies in cooperation with the United Nations
Population Fund. Similar programmes regarding
Syrian women and girls in Turkey will continue in the
upcoming period.

In terms of participation, we prioritize women's
participation in the temporary protection centres,
with their inclusion in both decision-making
and administration.

With regard to protection, an adequate number of
women staff are employed in the centres to maintain
quality health, education and security services for
women and girls.

On prevention, special measures are in place to
prevent assaults within the centres and to protect
vulnerable groups. Outside the centres, measures are
taken to promote the monitoring and prevention of
domestic and sexual violence.

In terms of empowerment, the enrolment of girls in
schooling and continuing education for women remains
a policy priority.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support for international, regional and national efforts
to end sexual violence in situations of armed conflict
and to respond to its consequences.

