Ms. Mohammed: At the outset, I wish to
congratulate the delegation of the United Kingdom to
the United Nations for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November. I also
wish to thank Ambassador Pierce, and through her
the United Kingdom, for giving us an opportunity to
brief the Security Council on our recent joint African
Union (AU)-United Nations solidarity mission to the
Horn of Africa, which was led by my dear sister Her
Excellency Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-
General - along with whom I am honoured to be
briefing the Council today - and Her Excellency
Ms. Bineta Diop, Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace
and Security.

As indicated by the Deputy Secretary-General,
senior women leaders from the African Union
Commission and the United Nations conducted a joint
solidarity mission on the participation of women in
peace, security and development and visited a number
of countries in the Horn of Africa from 21 to 26 October.
On the first day, the joint mission briefed the African
Union Peace and Security Council on the purpose
of the mission. We also met with the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for exchange and
guidance on the proposed engagements during the
mission. The central tenet of these missions is that of
supporting women's initiatives and enhancing their
roles and leadership in peace processes, governance
and the development of their communities, countries
and ultimately the transformation of Africa through
inclusive processes.

The mission to the Horn of Africa is the thirdjoint
AU-United Nations solidarity mission. This past year, in
July 2018, we had the opportunity to brief the Security
Council after the second joint mission, which had taken
us to South Sudan, the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel
region (see S/PV.8306). Then, we witnessed first-hand
that peace, security and development had little chances
to stand without the full and effective participation
of women and young people, who are on the front
line addressing climate insecurity, radicalization and
violent extremism. Our efforts this year highlighted
the poignant realities of women and girls who continue
to suffer from exclusion, communal conflict, internal
displacement, unregulated migration and Violent
extremism. However, in the midst of the challenges
faced by women, girls and young people in the Horn
of Africa, our delegation also witnessed resilience,
commitment and a strong drive for the transformation
of the region. Indeed, in all of the countries we visited,
the delegation witnessed the creativity and innovation
of women in the political and socioeconomic spheres of
their societies. We must all bolster their laudable and
courageous initiatives. With that in mind, permit me
to share some of our experiences and perceptions from
this year's visit.

In Ethiopia, our joint delegation sat down
and listened to the testimonies of women leading
peacebuilding efforts at the grassroots level. The
Mothers for Peace initiative has endeavoured to
sensitize young people to the dangers of ethnic division
as the country undertakes to build a democratic and
peaceful country. The delegation also met with women
peacekeepers, who play a pivotal role in Ethiopia's
engagement in peace operations. We participated in
the launch of the National Ethiopian Chapter of the
African Women Leaders Network (AWLN), together
with the President of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, Her Excellency Mrs. Sahle-Work Zewde,
herself an AWLN pioneer. The National Ethiopian
Chapter of the AWLN will seek to contribute to
ensuring women's financial inclusion, empower rural
women, mentor young women and support women's
participation in peace and development. Our delegation
further seeks to continue supporting women-led
movements that are transforming the lives of people
on the ground through that network. We also visited
a shelter for women victims of human trafficking and
heard first hand their plight as they try to reconcile
their experiences and try to heal from the physical and
mental wounds. The African Union, in partnership with
its member States, is providing leadership to tackle
the challenges of human trafficking in the region. The
African Union-Horn of Africa initiative on human
trafficking and migrant smuggling provides a platform
for countries in the region to exchange information,
share experiences and deliberate on policies and
strategies to effectively respond to that menace.

In Djibouti, our joint delegation met with women
parliamentarians and entrepreneurs in new technologies
and media, as well as medical doctors who are leading
transformation on the ground. Our meeting with the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Ismail
Omar Guelleh, was very positive. He reaffirmed the
country's commitment to strengthening women's
participation in governance and peace, especially in
the light of the new era for peace in the region. The
African Union remains committed to supporting the
Government, women and young people of Djibouti in
an effort to achieve the objectives inscribed in Agenda
2063: The Africa We Want and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In Somalia, the joint mission was received by
the Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Hassan Ali
Khayre, and other senior Government officials. Our
consultations focused on women's participation in
elections and preventing violent extremism. At the
headquarters of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), we were inspired by our engagements with
women peacekeepers. We shared in their activities at
the community level, as well as in improving enhanced
civil-military relations, which allows AMISOM. to
support national initiatives on women's leadership for
peace and elections. The AU reaffirms its commitment
to the participation of women in its mission in
that country, and the AU is actively engaging its
member States to increase women's participation in
peacekeeping and to increase the number of women in
their national defence and security services.

In Eritrea, women's economic empowerment
featured strongly with interactions on darn projects
led by young women engineers to provide water for
households and agriculture. The joint delegation also
met with the National Union of Eritrean Women, a
leading force for women that goes back to the years
of the liberation struggle. We also met with a dynamic
group of young women who are committed to building
their country and inspired by a future filled with hope
and potential. The joint delegation also held a fruitful
meeting with the President of Eritrea, Mr. Isaias
Afwerki, as well as with ministers, senior Government
officials and the diplomatic community. We had
important exchanges and discussed the meaningful
participation of women in all sectors for peace, security
and development. Despite the positive perceptions
garnered from the initiatives on the ground, there is
no doubt that efforts have to be redoubled in order to
ensure that we remain on track towards achieving the
development goals we have set for ourselves.

Last week, during the open debate on women and
peace and security (see S/PV.8649), we were reminded
that the realities on the ground are far from reflective
of the pronouncements and commitments in our
deliberations and decisions. It is time for us to break
that cycle. Women's aspirations and initiatives that
we heard and saw in our interactions across the four
countries provide a clear basis to affirm that women's
participation is imperative if we want to deliver on our
commitments. Substantive support to their organizations
and projects and continued engagement with member
States to create the conducive environment for women's

participation in decision-making, at all levels, from
grassroots to higher office, should be prioritized.
In French they say "Z'union fail la force" - there
is strength in unity. Indeed, concerted efforts between
our two institutions, guided by the frameworks of
cooperation on peace, security and development,
provide an immense opportunity to bridge the gaps on
women's leadership. I had an opportunity to brief the
Council last week (see S/PV.8650), alongside Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Hannah Tetteh,
on AU-United Nations cooperation, which continues to
strengthen as we make significant progress in a number
of areas. It is important that our organizations continue
to support women's initiatives, as they have impact
on communities. At the African Union Commission,
under the women, peace and security framework, we
want to emphasize the implementation of commitments
by various actors and strongly believe that partnership
with women's organizations will provide the vehicle for
concrete actions.

On that note, I would like to conclude with the
following points. First, the Horn of Africa must be
encouraged and supported to invest in its women
and youth. Secondly, we saw women's initiatives to
enhance participation in peace efforts, governance and
development geared towards service to the community
in all the countries we visited. They need Member State
and partner support. Thirdly, women peacekeepers in
the African Union Mission in Somalia are playing a key
role in the sensitization of Somali women to leadership
and community engagement. It is important to continue
to support their endeavours and provide them with
adequate gender-sensitive facilities to create a better
working environment for them. Lastly, the new era
of peace in the Horn of Africa provides an immense
opportunity for enhanced regional cooperation. It is
an opportunity to show true solidarity with the people
and the Governments of the region. I call on our two
institutions to be at the vanguard of that solidarity and
to respond to the aspirations of the people of the Horn
of Africa for a peaceful, stable and integrated region.

Allow me to end by commending the efforts
undertaken by the women and leadership of Djibouti,
Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia. The African Union
remains firm about the urgency of supporting those
regional efforts to ensure the full rebirth of the Horn
of Africa in line with our continental aspirations for
peace, security and development.

