Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank the Secretary-
General for his helpful briefing and engagement on this
important issue. We also welcome his report (A/70/729)
and its recommendations, and the appointment of Jane
Holl Lute Special Coordinator.

Let me begin by acknowledging the vital work
carried out by peacekeepers serving with missions
mandated by the Council, and by paying testament to
the courage and commitment they display in carrying
out their role in trying and dangerous circumstances.
As mentioned, Council membes saw this directly in
recent days on their visit to West Africa. But today
we must be frank in also acknowledging that our
systems for preventing, monitoring and responding to
instances of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeeping personnel are failing. This
failure is inflicting a terrible cost on the people that
our peacekeepers are responsible for protecting. The
reputation and effectiveness of the Organization are
being damaged.

These allegations represent more than isolated,
individual instances of wrong doing, and they are
not restricted to one or two missions. They represent
a systemic failure that all of us - the Secretariat,
contributing countries and Council members - have
a responsibility to fix. Continuing to muddle through
with our current business-as-usual approach is simply
not an option.

Zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse has
been our mantra for the past decade, and yet despite this,
and despite the many policies, standards and procedures
that have been put in place to address this since Prince
Zeid's landmark report (see A/59/710), we continue to
see new allegations emerge against peacekeepers and to
learn of new victims of crimes that are, at times, of an
horrific nature. This is despite the considerable high-

level attention directed to this issue, including by the
Secretary- General himself, over the past year.

We are not lacking a clear problem definition, or
policies and standards. What we are lacking appears
to be the political will to implement and enforce these
standards. Too often, a blind eye is turned to allegations
and no action is taken to hold those responsible
to account. We need to create a genuine culture
of zero tolerance - a culture where there is clear
accountability, both for abuse and for its prevention,
reporting and prosecution; a culture where the fear of
reputational damage from acknowledging allegations
does not override the responsibility to respond
effectively; a culture where the real stigma lies not with
the allegations themselves, but in failing to adequately
report and respond.

New Zealand understands that there are no quick
and easy solutions and that there are many practical and
operational challenges. We can address this problem
only if all concerned - the Council, the wider United
Nations system and troop- and police-contributing
countries - work together collaboratively to find
solustions. At the heart of our response must be the
victims of abuse and their right to respect, support
and accountability. An effective response to serious
crimes and human rights violations will also go some
way towards restoring the credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the communities they are
sent to protect.

Council members have been working on a draft
resolution to address these shortcomings. New Zealand
thanks the United States for its initiative. The Security
Council can support action in several key areas.

First, we must support the Secretary-General's
commitment to repatriating those contingents that
demonstrate a widespread or systematic pattern of
sexual exploitation or abuse or a consistent failure to
adequately follow up on allegations.

Secondly, we must remove the obstacles around
making complaints and ensure better management of
all complaints received. Processes for dealing with
victims need to be centrally coordinated and managed
more carefully and confidentially.

Thirdly, victims need to receive the support,
assistance and responses that they deserve. Many
aspects of the approach in the 2008 United Nations
Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse should simply
be baseline work for any United Nations mission.

Fourthly, the United Nations needs to get more
serious about systems and resources for vetting
peacekeepers. The current policy is limited to screening
senior leadership only, and the United Nations needs to
invest much more in order to go further than that.

Fifthly, we need a better process and division ofroles
on investigative duties. No national legal system would
build in a lO-day delay to begin investigation, as set
for the United Nations if a troop- or police-contributing
country is unable to investigate.

Finally, we believe that it is beyond question
that the Council has both a right and an obligation to
engage on this issue. New Zealand fully respects the
competence and role of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee,
but we strongly disagree with the suggestion that the
Council is not responsible for the consequences of the
mandates it approves or for the actions of the personnel
it deploys. The draft resolution we have is primarily
about implementing and enforcing the standards that
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the General Assembly have agreed or acknowledged
already.

We can and must provide for more effective
responses to sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping. We owe it to the victims, to
ourselves, to the peacekeepers who have given their
lives, and to the values on which the Organization was
founded.

