Mrs. Cerere (Kenya): I should like at the outset
to join other delegations in thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this very timely debate on
women and peace and security. My delegation
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/362) pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008).
Today's debate is timely, as it comes at a time when we
are being confronted with persistent, widespread and
systematic cases of sexual violence perpetrated against
civilians in conflict and non-conflict situations.

My delegation concurs with the Secretary-
General's report that sexual violence constitutes one of
the most serious violations of international
humanitarian, human rights and criminal law. Women
and girls make up a disproportionate percentage of the
victims of sexual violence. We must find the means to
hold accountable all perpetrators of this atrocity and to
provide justice to the victims. To that end, States
should endeavour to strengthen their domestic
capacities to protect vulnerable groups and to
investigate, prosecute and punish the perpetrators.

The effective implementation of resolution 1820
(2008) will require Governments, the private sector,
civil society and the United Nations system to reaffirm
their commitments and address the most urgent
challenges and obstacles to mainstreaming a gender
perspective into the area of international peace and
security. There is a need for States to ratify and
implement core international human rights instruments,
including the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women.

The appalling situation regarding sexual violence
perpetrated against women and girls in conflict
situations, especially in the Great Lakes region and the
Horn of Africa, has to be looked at seriously. As a
community of States, we must rigorously implement
the United Nations policy of zero tolerance with regard
to the sexual abuse and exploitation of women and
girls by staff and related personnel.
We must also provide protection to women and
ensure that putting a stop to war-related sexual
violence is prioritized at the international level. We
laud the crucial work being carried out by United
Nations agencies such as the United Nations
Population Fund, UNICEF and others in dealing with
these issues. Similarly, we need to galvanize support
for putting in place the infrastructure necessary to
ensure that victims of sexual violence receive quality
medical assistance.

In addition, during the post-conflict
reconstruction and healing process, decisions should
not be made for women; women must be part and
parcel of the process that affects them.

Kenya appreciates the great strides made by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in
promoting gender balance among peacekeeping
personnel. The incorporation of full-time gender
advisers into peacekeeping missions has been very
useful in that regard. Although gender balance is far
from having been attained, we have taken steps in the
right direction. DPKO needs to redouble its efforts to
achieve that goal. It must develop and disseminate to
States - especially troop-contributing countries -
effective guidelines to ensure sustained efforts in
gender mainstreaming at all levels of peacekeeping
operations.

Kenya has embarked on a vigorous process aimed
at improving its institutional capacity to hold to
account all perpetrators of crimes against human rights,
including sexual violence, by initiating reforms of its
law enforcement and justice administration agencies.
In addition, Kenya has made deliberate efforts to
increase the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. Currently, we have women in uniform in all
missions in which we are engaged. The adoption of the
Sexual Offences Act has facilitated a more effective
means of dealing with sexual offences, including rape.
This has been augmented through the establishment of
gender desks at police stations to deal specifically with
violations relating to violence against women.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our
condemnation of sexual violence against women and to
urge all Member States, civil society and the United
Nations system, particularly the Security Council and
the International Criminal Court, to put an end to
impunity in that regard. We support more concrete and
substantive measures to stem this vice. Perpetrators

must be held accountable for their nefarious deeds
through the actualization of a zero-tolerance policy
concerning sexual abuse and exploitation.

