Ms. Bavdaz Kuret (Slovenia): At the outset,
allow me to thank the presidency of South Africa for
organizing this open debate and the speakers for their
briefings and testimonials.

Slovenia welcomes the latest annual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/800), which shows that we
have moved from the "what" and the "why" towards
"how" to integrate a gender perspective in peace and
security. We commend the Secretary-General for
his personal commitment to gender equality and the
empowerment of women.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

In solidarity with those who will speak after me,
I will try to use only two minutes of the Council's
precious time and to limit my intervention to the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in Slovenia.

Slovenia's national implementation efforts are
reflected in the second national action plan, adopted in
2018. Slovenia is the only country in the world where
the positions of Chief of the Armed Forces and Chief
of Police are both held by women. At the Slovenian
Foreign Ministry, 57 per cent of diplomats are women
and 55 per cent of those deployed to foreign missions
are women. Women account for 40 per cent of Slovenian
ambassadors and heads of mission abroad; we still need
another 10 per cent to reach parity.

Slovenia has integrated the gender perspective into
a number ofnational strategies, such as those on national
security, migration, counter-terrorism and violent
extremism. It has established an education and training
centre for those heading on peacekeeping operations
and missions that provides training on women, peace
and security. Its new development cooperation and
humanitarian aid strategy confirms gender equality as
one of the two key, cross-cutting issues in Slovenian
development cooperation.

Finally, we can achieve tangible results only
by working together. In the words of the Secretary-
General,

"we must act immediately to halt any loss of
momentum or inconsistency in the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda,
deepen commitment where progress is building,
and maintain the course where results have been
achieved" (S/2019/800, para. 11).

Slovenia stands ready to do its part.

