Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan appreciates the United
Kingdom's initiative in convening this open debate. I
also thank the briefers for their valuable input.

As Da'esh uses sexual exploitation as a means
for their terrorist activities, many terrorist groups,
transnational criminal organizations and armed groups
use trafficking in persons as a method for fundraising
and recruitment. That is totally unacceptable.
Regrettably, the trafficking children and exploiting
them as combatants in armed conflicts are also taking
place in various parts of the world. Those examples
show how violations of human rights and dignity also
become threats to international peace and security. The
Security Council must therefore proactively address
that issue.

Resolution 2231 (2016), which was adopted in
December 2016, calls upon Member States to fully
implement the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. The Convention and
the Protocol are universal legal frameworks to combat
trafficking in persons, and their full implementation
and related technical assistance by the relevant United
Nations agencies are key. Japan therefore attaches
great importance to the assistance provided by the
United Nations United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and is stepping up its support to that
Office. In that regard, Japan has pledged approximately
$23 million to the UNODC, which should be disbursed
by the end of this month. That contribution is aimed at
bolstering terrorism prevention and building capacity
for law enforcement, mainly targeting countries
in Africa.

The global number of refugees, migrants and
internally displaced persons has reached a new
record since the Second World War. Among the many
vulnerable groups in the world, displaced populations
are increasingly targeted by human traffickers. Based
on the concept of human security, which is a human-
centred approach that places the interests of individuals
as a priority, Japan attaches importance to identifying,
protecting and providing assistance to victims. In that
regard, Japan has been contributing to the International
Organization for Migration's programmes against
trafficking in persons in countries such as Somalia
and Djibouti, among others. I am confident that such
efforts will help combat the root causes oftrafficking in
persons and lead to the promotion ofinternational peace
and security. Furthermore, the cooperation of all actors
who are engaged in peace and security, development,
humanitarian affairs and human rights both within and
outside the United Nations is crucial.

To conclude, I reaffirm J apan's commitment to
combatting trafficking in persons. The issue should
be addressed in various forums inside and outside the
Security Council. The high-level meeting ofthe General
Assembly to discuss the implementation of the Global
Plan of Action on Trafficking in Persons, to take place
in October, will be an important opportunity to assess
achievements, gaps and challenges. We look forward to
intensifying efforts towards and discussions about that
meeting and beyond.

