Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Sir, for bringing the Council together to discuss an
issue that is critically important to the United States,
and indeed to all nations. I also want to thank the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Margot Wallstrom, and Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, Rachel Mayanja,
for their very helpful briefings.

Through a series of resolutions spanning the past
decade, this Council has consistently called on all
parties to armed conflicts to respect women's rights.
This body has also called on those parties to do more in
the areas of conflict prevention, peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction efforts. The Council has
also trained attention on the clear link between
international peace and security and the use of sexual
violence as a tool of war against civilians.

The human cost is all too real. Armed conflict
continues to have a devastating impact on women and
girls, leaving them wounded, traumatized, sexually
assaulted, socially and economically marginalized or
without political power. Member States must renew
their commitment to resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) and intensify their efforts to
implement their provisions.

We are encouraged by the momentum that has
grown considerably in the past few months,
particularly in three areas: the appointment of Special
Representative Wallstrom and her work beginning to
assemble a team of well qualified staff; the formulation
of a team of experts; and the immediate attention that
the Special Representative has given to the grave crisis
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My Government is committed to supporting
Special Representative Wallstrom's work as she brings
her Office up to full operational strength. In particular,
we will look forward to the inclusion of a military
expert within Special Representative Wallstrom's
Office. This expert will help address ways that armed
forces can prevent and halt sexual and gender-based
10-33085
violence during conflict, support strategies to convince
military leaders from all sides of a conflict to prevent
their forces from committing rape and help United
Nations military leaders to develop effective strategies
to prevent rape during armed conflict. We are eager to
work with Special Representative Wallstrom and the
team of experts to ensure a coordinated approach to
addressing a series of critical issues, ending the cycle
of impunity, helping national authorities strengthen the
rule of law, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, providing assistance to victims and creating
a framework to help prevent emerging or recurring
outbreaks of violence or to provide early warning if
they cannot be staved off.

In particular, I would like to note how pleased my
Government is that Special Representative Wallstrom
has begun her work by dealing immediately with the
grave and worsening situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. But far more needs to be done
to develop frameworks and initiatives for addressing
sexual violence issues overall, even as attention must
be focused on specific countries and regions where
atrocities are being committed as we speak.

As we recognize the progress being made, we
also remain focused on the challenges that lie ahead,
including ending endemic sexual and gender-based
violence, linking our current efforts with successful
strategies for peacekeeping missions such as those in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Liberia,
building an enduring team of experts that can work
throughout the United Nations system and halting the
sexual and gender-based violence that often continues
even after a conflict subsides.

Let me say a few words about steps to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), as called for by resolution
1889 (2009). The Secretary-General's most recent
report (S/2010/l73) is an important step. The work of
the United Nations Technical Working Group on
Global Indicators, under the auspices of Special
Adviser Mayanja, has resulted in draft indicators to
measure the implementation of 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions. This report can serve as a basis for further
much-needed consultations to ensure that the indicators
are conceptually correct and measure qualitative
metrics and not just quantitative data, and to ensure
that these indicators can be realistically implemented.
We hope that the Council will move forward soon on a
final set of indicators to allow the United Nations to
start putting them into practice.
The United Nations plays critical roles in
promoting women's empowerment, deepening their
involvement in political processes and working to end
sexual violence in conflict zones. We support
advancing the broad set of women's issues through the
United Nations system, including through the
establishment of a robust, efficient and effective entity
to advance women's issues and women's rights.

Almost a decade after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the need to increase women's
participation in peace processes and to combat sexual
violence in conflict zones has not abated. Women and
girls whose lives and futures are on the line cannot
wait, so we look forward to a commemorative meeting
of the Security Council in October to mark the
resolutions tenth anniversary and to renew our
commitment to a world no longer blighted by impunity,
assault, discrimination and the use of rape as a weapon
of war.

