Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia recognizes the
critical role women play in peace and security. We are
a strong supporter of, and advocate for, Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), and have been ever
since its adoption. We demonstrate that commitment
both in our domestic actions and through our support
of countries in our region in their efforts to understand
and implement the resolution.

For example, we have an ongoing programme of
training on the implementation of the resolution for
personnel from within the Australian Defence Forces
and military personnel from other countries in the
Asia-Pacific region. This year we also supported a
Pacific Islands Forum regional workshop on gender,
conflict, peace and security - the first of its kind in
the Pacific. It was attended by policymakers and
representatives from military and law enforcement
agencies and from women's non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) from all 16 Pacific Islands
Forum countries. The workshop outcomes are now
guiding follow-up work on gender, peace and security.
We stand ready to assist with those activities wherever
appropriate.

Also in the Asia-Pacific region, we are supporting
two NGO projects that aim to enhance advocacy and
action towards the full implementation of the
resolution. They focus on strengthening regional
information-sharing, increasing awareness of the role
of women in national, regional and international
peacebuilding efforts, and the training of key policy-
makers in the region and NGOs on the implementation
of the resolution. They will also develop a regional
network of women whose names can be put forward by
their respective Governments for nomination for
positions in United Nations peacekeeping missions.

Domestically, Australia is also taking steps to
back our support for resolution 1325 (2000) with
concrete action. We actively engage women in our
peacekeeping efforts, and women military, police and
civilian personnel play a key role in our assistance to
United Nations peacekeeping missions and bilateral
and regional endeavours, such as the Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands.

More broadly, gender equality has been clearly
articulated as an overarching principle in the new white
paper on Australia's aid programme. A new gender
policy is being developed to underpin that
commitment, and practical guidelines have been
developed to address policy issues and operational
strategies to promote the role of women, including in
peacebuilding.

Advances have been made in understanding and
operationalizing the links between gender,
development, human rights, peace, security and justice.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirms the
role of women in preventing and resolving conflicts
and encourages making women central to negotiating
peace agreements, to peacekeeping operations and to
reconstructing societies stricken by war. It makes the
gender perspective and gender equality relevant to all
Security Council efforts.
We stress, however, that the concerns of women
must be addressed not just in the early stages of peace
processes but also in post-conflict rehabilitation and
reconstruction and in broader development efforts.
Gender equality is fundamental not just to achieving
peace but also to longer-term development and the
prevention of conflict.

Australia strongly supports resolution 1325
(2000). We will continue to find tangible ways through
our aid programme, our involvement in peacekeeping
missions - including regional missions - and at the
domestic level to implement the resolution.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate our
regional neighbour, Fiji, for setting an example in the
region by including key elements of the resolution in
its national women's plan of action. We are confident
that Fiji will also make a valuable contribution on
these issues through its membership of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is tasked with
integrating the gender perspective into all of its work.

