Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): My delegation
welcomes this debate, and would like to make
a few remarks in addition to the statements by
the observer of the European Union and others
underlining the importance of women's civil society
organizations in contributing to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

The Netherlands has placed gender equality at the
heart of its policies for decades. On the international
level, we support female leadership, the follow-
up to resolution 1325 (2000), women's economic
empowerment and the elimination of violence against
women.

In December 2011, the Netherlands launched
its second 1325 national action plan, covering the
period 2012-2015. As we see it, the plan is unique of
its kind, since it is based on and encompasses close
cooperation between Government, civil society
and research institutions. It brings together Dutch
Government ministries and research institutions and
32 civil society organizations, including multinational
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), women's
peace movements and diaspora organizations. Our
national action plan is based on many different sources
of knowledge and experience and is designed to be
both ambitious and feasible. It has a thematic and a
geographical focus. Thematically, it is fully dedicated
to enhancing female leadership and political leverage
in conflict-affected societies. Geographically, it
focuses on six countries - Afghanistan, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, the
Sudan and Colombia - as well as on the Middle East
and North Africa region.

As a result of that approach, the Dutch national
action plan includes many joint activities that benefit
from the complementarity between Government bodies
and civil society in the Netherlands and their partner
organizations in the focus countries. I would like to
mention a few examples in that regard.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Netherlands will support the national women's fund
in promoting Congolese women's participation in
the coming elections. We will also support women
in the eastern part of the country who can play a
mediation role in the conflict that is still raging in the
Kivus. Similarly, in Burundi as well as in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the signatories to
the Dutch national action plan will support a regional
organization programme that will cooperate with local
women's and media organizations to increase public
support for women's political participation and to
strengthen the capacity of women's organizations to
campaign, including by using media technologies.

In Afghanistan, a group of signatories is working
with a local telephone and Internet provider to start
a programme connecting poor rural women and men
with more modern youth in the main towns via an SMS
platform, using SMS-based blogging. The objective
is to keep the rural poor better informed on national
women's issues and to foster dialogue between rural
poor and urban youth. In Libya, we support a capacity-
building programme to enable women to make a
meaningful contribution to the development of the new
constitution.

The Dutch Government also attaches a high priority
to the financial implementation of its second national
action plan. An amount of €2 million is available
annually for the period 2012-2015 for programmes
in the six partner countries, with the same amount
reserved for the Middle East and North Africa regions.
Last year, the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs
established the Funding Leadership and Opportunities
for Women fund (FLOW), the largest women's fund
in the world. Between 2012 and 2015 FLOW will
invest €78 million in women's organizations, many of
them in conflict-affected areas. Finally, a new fund
is being established with the Dutch NGO HIVOS and
the accounting firm of PriceWaterhouseCoopers to
strengthen the financial and organizational management
of women's organizations in the Middle East and North
Africa regions. In that way, we hope to be able to share
and support the commitments made during the Equal
Futures Partnership event hosted by United States
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton last month.

In conclusion, the potential role of women's
organizations in any social or political transformation
is huge. Women can and should play a pivotal role in
their societies, and they deserve our support in helping
them to take the lead more effectively. Transition
processes like the ones in the North Africa region are
an opportunity for women to translate their influence
into formal roles. The same is true for women and
their organizations working in fragile countries.
Women across the world involved in peacebuilding,
reconciliation and democratization will continue to
find the Netherlands at their side.

