Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica): It is an honour for
Costa Rica to speak in its capacity as Chair of the
Human Security Network. The Network is a cross-
regional group of countries that includes Austria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland and Thailand,
with South Africa as an observer.

On behalf of the members, I would like to express
our appreciation for the convening of an open debate
on this important topic and thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrijm, for the
presentation of the report (S/2010/604).
The Human Security Network stresses the need to
provide coherent and strategic leadership in the United
Nations on the issue of sexual violence in conflict,
including through the allocation of appropriate
resources in implementing the mandate conferred on
Ms. Wallstrom by the Security Council in its resolution
1888 (2009). We would like to express our support to
Ms. Wallstrom and encourage her to build strong
synergies with the United Nations operational system.

Less than two months ago, we celebrated the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). Unfortunately, progress towards the
implementation of cross-cutting gender commitments,
especially those aimed at curbing, punishing
perpetrators of and protecting against sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict, has not been
satisfactory. In that respect, we welcome the progress
made on Ms. Wallstrom's five-point priority agenda as
a step forward in the process.

The report highlights, inter alia, the challenges
posed by inaccurate information about sexual violence,
inadequate preventive measures and the failure to end
impunity. In the light of such challenges, we strongly
support the efforts of the United Nations system to
establish monitoring, reporting and analysis
arrangements with regard to conflict-related sexual
violence.

Timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information, verified by the United Nations system, on
conflict-related sexual violence is crucial to addressing
this issue in a comprehensive and systematic manner. It
must be the basis for further action by the Security
Council, including the adoption of sanctions and other
targeted measures, and for including in the Secretary-
General's annual reports to the Council detailed
information on parties to armed conflict who are
credibly suspected of committing or being responsible
for acts of rape or other forms of sexual Violence.

As suggested in the report, the arrangements
should take into account experiences gained and
practices developed through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism established pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009) on
children and armed conflict.

Sexual violence, including by parties to armed
conflicts, is unacceptable at any time. We call on all of
them to cease such acts and to make concrete
commitments in this regard, as called for in resolution
1960 (2010), adopted yesterday.

All necessary steps, including targeted measures,
must be taken to protect individuals, hold perpetrators
accountable and provide remedy to victims. Ending
impunity for perpetrators and those responsible in
chains of command, including United Nations
personnel, is imperative. The Rome Statute's
qualification of sexual-related crimes as potential war
crimes and crimes against humanity constituted a
major achievement in the fight against impunity. In this
connection, we urge the Security Council to refer
relevant cases to the International Criminal Court.

The Human Security Network also takes note of
the recommendation regarding the adoption by relevant
sanctions committees of sanctions and other targeted
measures against individuals and entities. In this regard,
the exchange of information among United Nations
peacekeeping missions, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Security Council
sanctions committees will be of great importance.

Women's full enjoyment of all human rights has
been a priority of the Human Security Network since
its inception. While it is crucial to this agenda that we
maintain momentum in the fight against sexual
violence, we also underline the importance of women's
empowerment as part of the solution. Sustainable peace
is not possible without the participation of women; and
without the participation of women in laying the
foundations for sustainable peace, sustainable
development may also be hindered in the future.

We particularly welcome the adoption of a new
resolution on sexual violence in conflict. We express
our hope that efforts to combat sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict and its aftermath will be
strengthened in a manner that will support a coherent
and comprehensive United Nations response consistent
with the conceptualization of the newly-created UN
Women.

Neither silence, nor tolerance, nor impunity is an
option when facing the perpetrators. This is a message
that should clearly emanate from the Security Council,
and one that must resonate with us all.
