The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Wallstrom, Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy and Lieutenant General Gaye for their
very powerful and insightful briefings. I also want to
thank my colleagues on the Council for their very
strong statements of support for resolution 1960
(2010), just adopted, as well as for the broad goals of
fighting sexual violence and the rape of women around
the world.

We are gathered because we all agree on the
importance of addressing an issue that cries out for the
world's conscience, and that is sexual violence in
conflict. We agree that the challenge is urgent and
immense. The human cost is all too real. Armed

conflicts continue to have a devastating impact,
particularly on women and girls. Rape, sexual assault
and gender-based violence are all too often used
deliberately and cynically as weapons of war, and the
fight to end sexual violence has yet to be universally
recognized as central to securing international peace
and security.

Some still think that sexual violence is somehow
a natural accompaniment of conflict. It is not. As the
Secretary-General's report notes,

"The myth that rape is an inevitable by-
product of war is persistent and dangerously self-
fulfilling" (S/2010/604, para. 7).

I hope that this meeting, in some small way, will help
put an end to that myth and channel our shared
commitment to confronting and combating sexual
violence into concrete actions that improve the fate of
women and girls.

The United States commends the United Nations,
especially United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for its leadership in finding
effective ways to address this problem. We have been
encouraged by the United Nations response and follow-
up to the appalling August attacks in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including the additional steps it
has taken to build mission-wide strategies to better
protect civilians. The United Nations has increased
random patrols, recruited more female peacekeepers
and improved communications. It is also employing
scenario-based training for peacekeepers to help
combat sexual violence.

But obviously, more must still be done. We hope
that the United Nations will continue to identify
women's protection advisers and put them in more
peacekeeping operations, and complete a gaps analysis
of United Nations protection strategies.

In her brief tenure so far, Special Representative
Wallstrom has brought leadership, passion and clarity
to efforts to end impunity for the heinous crimes of
sexual violence in conflict zones. She is playing a vital
role in the United Nations efforts to support the
response of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the horrifying mass rapes in
Walikale, which has included the arrest of one of the
perpetrators. The United States fully supports Special
Representative Wallstrom in her work, and we
encourage our fellow Member States to consider
additional voluntary contributions to support her
mandate. We particularly hope that the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law will become a valuable tool in
helping Member States develop appropriate judicial
responses to sexual violence in conflict.

Data collection is also vital for non-humanitarian
activities to prevent and respond to gender-based
violence. The resolution we adopted today will
improve the collection and analysis of information
required to better understand the patterns of sexual
violence in armed conflict. Of course, better
information by itself will not halt sexual violence, but
it will inform our decisions as a Council and as
Member States, and bring us one step closer to our
ultimate goal.

We must also shine the international spotlight on
the perpetrators and use this mechanism to inform
targeted actions by the Council and by Member States.
With improved information, the United Nations will be
able to assist States in responding more robustly to
these crimes. As in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo after the Walikale rapes, we expect our actions
to spur commanding officers to turn those who commit
sexual violence over to the authorities to be brought to
justice.

Finally, we cannot separate the challenge of
sexual violence from the broader security issues facing
the Council. Resolution 1960 (2010), its predecessors
and our follow-up actions must send a clear message.
We do not just condemn sexual violence and rape as
weapons of war, but we are taking concrete steps to
end it. We are working to make clear that rape and
sexual violence are unacceptable and that perpetrators
will face consequences. Our shared responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
includes a profound responsibility to safeguard the
lives and the security of women and girls, who make
up at least half of humankind.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Armenia.

