Mr. Okuda (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over today's important debate on sexual
violence in armed conflict.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for personally presenting his first report (S/2009/362)
pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008). We also commend
the invaluable efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to collect the information and
insights from many stakeholders that made this report
possible.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) by the Security Council last year was a
milestone because, through the agency of the Council,
the international community recognized that sexual
violence committed amidst armed conflict is a security
issue. Such violence, when used as a strategy for
waging war, not only causes physical and
psychological damage to the victims, but also
significantly sets back any momentum that may have
been generated towards achieving peace and security.

In the year that has passed since the resolution
was adopted, it is clear that some progress has been
made in protecting civilians from sexual violence. As
mentioned in the report, United Nations peacekeeping
missions have strengthened their mandates to provide
effective protection, including in response to sexual
violence. The Peacebuilding Commission has also been
active in addressing this issue, and civil society has
enhanced its advocacy activities.

Japan is also pleased that, by unanimously
adopting resolution 1882 (2009), the Council has now
strengthened its responses to rape and other sexual
violence against children in armed conflict. The
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) nevertheless
faces many challenges. We are deeply concerned, for
example, that grievous sexual violence continues to be
rampant in a number of countries, including the Sudan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Chad.

Now is the time to translate the commitment we
made in that resolution into concrete action. While the

report addresses a broad range of issues, I would like
to focus here on three points that we regard as
particularly important: data collection and reporting,
impunity and accountability, and coordination within
the United Nations system.

The first important challenge we face is to clarify
what our objectives are in collecting data, to enhance
the systems we employ to that end, and to report on
sexual violence. In order for the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, to
be able to act against sexual violence in armed conflict,
accurate data collection on the ground and timely
reporting are vital. We therefore welcome the decision
of the Secretary-General to take action to "ensure more
coherent, comprehensive and regular reporting on
sexual violence" (S/2009/362, para. 53) through the
senior-level Mission focal point system. This system
will expand the capacity of a mission to engage in
monitoring and reporting and to "coordinate with the
United Nations country team to review current data
collection methods and databases" (ibid.) with a view
to enabling the reporting mechanism to produce more
coherent and comprehensive information.

Bearing in mind the newly adopted resolution
1882 (2009), United Nations agencies concerned with
sexual violence need to increase their cooperation with
the monitoring and reporting mechanisms led by the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF.

In collecting data on sexual violence and in the
light of the sensitivity of the issue, the first priority
should be protection of the victims and their privacy.
Establishing a commission of inquiry to investigate
sexual violence in conflict countries, as recommended
by the Secretary-General, is an interesting option.

However, we need to give careful consideration
to the feasibility of the idea, and specifically to how
information would be collected and shared and to
whether the objective of data collection would be to
facilitate the prosecution of perpetrators or simply to
build a strong information resource.

The second challenge is ending impunity for
those responsible for sexual violence in armed conflict
and ensuring accountability. Both are essential, and we
therefore strongly urge the Governments of countries
in conflict to undertake comprehensive legal and
judicial reforms. In this connection, we are encouraged
to learn from the report that some progress has in fact
been made in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Liberia and the Sudan towards improving legal
mechanisms against sexual violence.

If we want these efforts to succeed, however, we
must provide capacity-building assistance, such as
training for judicial and law enforcement officials on
international human rights and humanitarian law, as
well as on the revision of national laws and improving
the manner in which they are applied.

We expect that serious crimes, such as crimes
against humanity, will be referred to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). At the same time, bearing in
mind that the ICC prosecutes only those who bear the
greatest responsibility, the Security Council must
consider feasible and appropriate alternative
mechanisms for ensuring the accountability of all
perpetrators of sexual violence in any conflict
situation. We anticipate that the Secretary-General will
include a proposal for such mechanisms in his follow-
up report.

Thirdly, strengthening coordination within the
United Nations system is essential to implementing
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), as a number
of United Nations agencies are engaged in combating
sexual violence in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations. We support the commitment that the
Secretary-General makes in his report to strengthening
coordination in the United Nations system so that there
will be a coherent and comprehensive multisector
response both at Headquarters and at the local level.

One useful coordination mechanism is United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which is expected to be utilized not only to promote
the sharing of information and eliminate the
duplication of work, but also to integrate the policies
and programmes of the United Nations system as a
whole, particularly in the field. In that context, we note
that the Secretary-General is considering the
appointment of a senior person to be responsible for
coordinating the prevention of and response to sexual
violence across the United Nations system.

Allow me to say just a few more words on the
subject of human security in connection with the topic
that we are now discussing. In order to respond
effectively to the needs of women and girls who are
victims of sexual violence, we must apply the concept
of human security. Such a multisector approach focuses
on both protection and empowerment at the individual
and community levels. For that reason, at the sixth
meeting of Friends of Human Security, held this past
June and co-hosted by Japan and Mexico, the subject
of sexual violence against women in armed conflict
had a prominent place on the agenda.

For the same reason, through the United Nations
Trust Fund for Human Security, Japan has been
providing support for projects that address the issue of
violence against women and its root causes in a
comprehensive and multisectoral manner in countries
including the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia and Burundi.

In 2010, we shall commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security. As that observance
draws near, we must redouble our efforts to produce
concrete and tangible results on this important issue.
The Security Council simply must strengthen its
response to sexual violence in armed conflict. To that
end, we request the Secretary-General to continue to
submit regular reports on the progress that is being
made in the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008),
as it is a matter of great concern to all of us.

