Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Uruguay for organizing today's debate and
welcome the presence of its Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Jose' Luis Cancela. Chile takes this
opportunity to express its thanks to the briefers for their
statements and to Ms. Zainab Bangura, whose mandate
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict is coming to an end, for
her work.
As described in the latest report (S/2017/249) of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence,
the depth and breadth of this scourge is of concern to
us. The manifestations of this violence are not limited
to rape alone, but include other serious crimes, such
as forced prostitution, sexual slavery, forced pregnancy
and other shameful forms of sexual violence. Of special
concern to us is the fact that this violence is a tactic of
terrorism, used not only to intimidate and demoralize
the population but also as a source of income for
financing terrorist tactics.

Greater awareness of the seriousness of this problem
is required for there to be sufficient understanding of
how to implement measures needed for prevention,
protection, rehabilitation and reintegration. In that
regard, we have noted with interest initiatives such as
that put forward by the United Kingdom on preventing
sexual violence in conflict and stigmatization.
Similarly, the guidance note of the Secretary-General
on reparations for conflict-related sexual violence, of
June 2014, offers guidelines and best practices for us
to consider. We also believe that we must promote and
protect the work ofjournalists reporting on these crimes.
They risk their security in their work of exposing and
combating impunity. We also welcome the deployment
in United Nations missions of women's protection
advisers, who have, inter alia, helped improve access to
and the quality of information.

Ensuring that justice is served is essential if
victims are to have some level of spiritual and
material compensation. That is why the international
community must combat impunity. Furthermore,
the non-applicability of statutes of limitations for
these crimes is a fundamental tool for ensuring
just compensation. Trust funds set up for such
purposes - for example, the Multi-Partner Trust Fund
and the International Criminal Court's Trust Fund for
Victims - are a step in the right direction and require
sustainable financial support.

We must broaden and intensify our efforts aimed
at prevention. Educational programmes at all levels are
required, particularly in armed forces, including for
contingents participating in peacekeeping operations.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions, as well as the drafting by countries
of national plans, is key for prevention. Chile's second
national plan has expanded the training and education it
offers to include the gender perspective, sexual violence
and the human rights of women in peacekeeping
operations, both for police and military components
and for civilian staff participating in such operations,
or at any stage of conflict-resolution and post-conflict
processes. We express our solidarity with the victims
of this serious transgression and the subsequent
stigmatization from which many of them suffer, which
we must eradicate by making every effort to expose
those who are responsible, namely, the perpetrators
of these crimes and those who incite them to commit
such atrocities.

In conclusion, we would like to extend our solidarity
to the victims of this serious scourge and express
our gratitude to all actors devoted to eradicating it,
including civil society and its efforts in this area.

