Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this open
debate on women and peace and security, focusing on
the pressing issue of sexual violence in conflict. My
delegation expresses its appreciation to Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for her
briefing and to Ms. Hamsatu Allamin for her poignant
presentation.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.

It is a sad truth that situations of conflict have
throughout history formed the backdrop for heinous
violations of sexual violence against civilians,
disproportionately affecting women and girls, as well
as men and boys. In this regard, over the past two
decades the international normative framework to
end and prevent sexual violence in conflict has been
fortified, inter alia through seven resolutions adopted
by the Council, including resolution 1325 (2000).

And yet the seventh annual report of the Secretary-
General on sexual violence in conflict (S/2015/203)
provides a shocking reminder that sexual violence
continues to be widely committed as a tactic of war,
causing devastating consequences for women and
girls and shattering local communities caught in the
crossfire. The report documents cases of women
and girls being sexually assaulted while farming or
collecting firewood; abducted from homes and schools
en masse to be sold into sexual slavery or forced
marriages; or compelled to flee neighbourhoods to
escape persecution, only to find themselves at risk of
sexual violence in displacement camps.

The physical and personal insecurity faced by
women and children in situations of armed conflict
permeates daily lives and routines, resulting in
intolerable environments and prolonged instability.
Clearly we need to redouble our efforts to ensure
the effective implementation of all Security Council
resolutions in preventing sexual violence and returning
peace, security and stability to conflict-stricken areas.
The report also highlights recurring challenges and
new trends in conflict-related sexual Violence, namely,
the rise of violent extremist groups. Malaysia is deeply
alarmed at the fact that violent extremist groups are using
sexual violence as a means to terrorize, persecute and
conquer. We condemn in strongest terms the barbaric
acts of sexual violence committed by Al-Qaida, Boko
Haram, Daesh and their ilk, particularly against women
and girls, which have caused unspeakable anguish to
families and local communities.

In parallel with disturbing reports of sexual
violence being committed against women, we are also
witnessing cases of women and youth, including young
girls, being lured into joining such groups. Given the
complexity of the spheres of influence surrounding
violent extremist groups and their link to terrorism, the
international community must ensure that its response
is multidimensional and takes into account the fact
that women are victims as well as agents of violent
extremism. In this regard, we agree that measures
to prevent and address sexual violence should be
strategically aligned with efforts to prevent violent
extremism.

In underlining the primary responsibility of
Governments to ensure the protection of civilians and
uphold human rights, we firmly support the efforts
of national Governments to strengthen measures
to eliminate sexual Violence in conflict, including
through the adoption of action plans in concert with
the United Nations. We also commend the initiatives
of Governments to protect the rights of victims of
sexual violence and improve access to justice through
the passage of relevant legislation. The importance
of accountability and justice mechanisms cannot be
overstated, and we believe that national capacities must
be enhanced and supported in this regard.

We note that the majority of parties listed in the
annex to the Secretary-General's annual report consist
of non-State armed groups and hold the View that
peace processes provide a critical forum of engagement
with such groups. We call for provisions on sexual
violence in conflict to be integrated into all peace
processes, negotiations and agreements. In this regard,
we recognize the great value of the United Nations
Guidance for Mediators: Addressing Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence in Ceasefire and Peace Agreements
as a tool in training envoys, mediators and mediation
experts.

At the same time, the involvement of women
in peace processes is crucial, and we commend the
efforts of those Member States that have specifically
reserved space at the negotiating table for meaningful
participation by women, including survivors of sexual
violence.

Malaysia believes that peacekeeping missions and
peace operations must be adequately supported so as
to respond and prevent incidents of sexual violence
in conflict. We believe that this can be done through
standardized pre-deployment and in-mission training.
Mindful of this need, Malaysia's Peacekeeping Training
Centre has collaborated, and continues to collaborate,
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and United Nations partners to provide training in
various aspects of peacekeeping for countries in Asia
and beyond. One current project running from March
2014 to December 2015 involves developing training
manuals and modules on, inter alia, gender, cultural
diversity in peacekeeping operations and the protection
of civilians.

We note with appreciation the complementary roles
of women protection advisers and gender advisers in
United Nations missions in ensuring the effective
implementation of Council resolutions on sexual
Violence in conflict and on women, peace and security,
and we call for these posts to be sufficiently budgeted
for.

The stigmatization faced by victims of sexual
violence contributes to the persistent underreporting
of sexual Violence cases and remains a challenge that
needs to be overcome. This stigma also affects the
children born to victims of sexual violence, who are
sometimes abandoned or grow up shunned by society.
We call for national Governments and civil-society
actors, including religious leaders, to step up efforts to
reduce the paralysing stigma experienced by survivors
of sexual violence at the community level.

We stress that survivors of sexual Violence
must receive timely and comprehensive assistance
and health-care services to aid their recovery and
reintegration into communities. We urge that consistent
funding be channelled into reintegration programmes
that empower women and girls, especially livelihood
programmes and education opportunities. We also
support the design and implementation of reparation
programmes as a tool for empowerment in line with
the recommendations of the Guidance Note of the
Secretary-General on Reparations for Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence.

The wounds inflicted by conflict-related sexual
violence can scar survivors and communities for
generations. The collective and coordinated response of
all stakeholders, including Member States, the United
Nations and civil society, is crucial to ensuring long-
term strategies that will allow scarred communities
to heal and rebuild. I wish to conclude by taking this
opportunity to particularly commend the tenacious
work of Ms. Bangura, as well as the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and
United Nations Action, in catalysing responses in this
field. Malaysia pledges its support for all these efforts.

