Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me start by expressing
our deepest condolences to the Government and
Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation for the
tragic attack against His Excellency Ambassador
Andrey Karlov. Our condolences also go to the victims
of the Berlin market attack. Our prayers go to their
bereaved families.
I would like to thank Spain for convening this open
debate. I also thank His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon
and the other briefers for their remarks.

All human beings possess fundamental human
rights, which are inherent to their noble dignity and
respect. Trafficking in persons is a wicked crime that
violates those rights. The trafficking of vulnerable
people, especially women and children, who should be
protected in conflict situations, is an even more heinous
crime; they are deceived or abducted into exploitation,
torture and servitude. Indonesia condemns modern
slavery and human trafficking and supports their
elimination. Like others, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 2331 (2016) today.

Recognizing the seriousness of the problem, the
Indonesian Government has taken concrete action
at the national, regional and international levels.
At the national level, the Government of Indonesia
enacted Law Number 21 of 2007, which criminalizes
all kinds of human trafficking. At the regional level,
Indonesia and Australia initiated the Bali Process on
People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related
Transnational Crime, in 2002. Besides effectively
raising regional awareness of the consequences of
people smuggling, trafficking in persons and related
transnational crimes, the Bali Process has also
developed and implemented strategies and practical
cooperation in its response.

At the international level, Indonesia has ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. In 2015, we joined the international
community in adopting the Sustainable Development
Goals, which, inter alia, also commit to taking action
against human trafficking.

Despite a strong collective push to raise the bar
in stopping such human exploitation at all levels,
there has been intense defiance from the perpetrators.
However, the international community cannot relent
in discouraging human trafficking in conflict zones.
All methods, including denouncing, disrupting and
protecting should be exercised. But perhaps the best
method would be prevention and protection, which can
be achieved in many ways.

First and foremost, investing in the prevention of
conflict is one of the best protections against human
trafficking. Yet in cases where conflict prevention
may not necessarily be possible, the international
community needs to commit to resolve the conflicts in
which human trafficking thrives.

Secondly, we should more robustly implement
the international Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, including in conflict
settings - be it the trafficking of persons who are
fleeing a conflict or those trafficked into forced military
service and in post-conflict reconstruction work.

Thirdly, the United Nations system's capabilities
could be enhanced to protect those vulnerable to
human trafficking in conflict. We could analyse
further ways to incorporate humanitarian actions with
human trafficking. From the outset of a conflict crisis,
anti-trafficking measures should be incorporated into
all humanitarian interventions in conflict zones as part
of life-saving protection activities.

It is unfortunate that humanitarian action is intended
in some cases to be a temporary fix for populations that
are experiencing hazardous situations. We should take
a long-term view in terms of empowering vulnerable
populations, so that they can play an active role in
preventing human trafficking. In short, it is pertinent
to employ anti-trafficking strategies in the planning
and implementation of humanitarian responses, so as
to ensure durable solutions.

Lastly, those who engage in human trafficking
will remain determined to challenge our cause. The
international community must never relent in countering
human traffickers. Let us fight against exploitation and
bring those responsible to account and to justice. We
must preserve the dignity of all human beings.

