Mr. Hultqvist (Sweden): I first wish to thank
Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf for their excellent
introductions and briefings.

Of all the evil acts that take place in conflict
settings, sexual violence may be the one that casts
the longest shadow. The lives of victims are changed
forever. Besides the physical scars that the victims bear,
they will carry the hidden trauma and stigma for the
rest of their lives. We can see that the use of sexual
violence in conflicts destroys societies, families and
community structures, as its goal is to dominate and
control the society concerned. Therefore, every effort
must be taken to end sexual violence in conflict, and
I thank Uruguay for organizing this open debate on
the topic.

We would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General and the acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for their insightful and, sadly, very
troubling accounts of sexual violence in conflict settings.

Let me also thank Ms. Bangura, the outgoing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, for her strong leadership
during her tenure, and welcome the incoming Special
Representative, Ms. Patten. She has our strong support.
We also express our thanks to the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Sexual violence in any situation is a crime, but
conflict-related sexual violence is also a core security
challenge that must be kept on the Council's agenda.
Why? Because the use of sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism has not stopped. On the contrary,
sexual violence, human trafficking and the exploitation
of vulnerable persons through modern slavery in the
midst of migration are growing trends worldwide.

We must move from expressing outrage to taking
decisive action. The following are some concrete
measures that the Security Council and each Member
State can undertake.

First, they can apply a comprehensive rights-based
approach focused on the needs and experiences of
victims. Ensuring human rights, especially the right to
freedom from violence and to sexual and reproductive
health and rights, remains essential. Sexual violence
in all its forms is prohibited in armed conflict under
international humanitarian law. Perpetrators must be
held accountable.

Secondly, they can make conflict-related
sexual violence a priority issue in monitoring the
implementation of Security Council mandates. To
that end, we need improved data, including sex-
disaggregated statistics, as well as accurate accounts.
That is why we strongly welcome briefings by civil
society to the Council, such as that made by Ms. Mina
Jaf today. We also welcome the use of conclusions
submitted by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and the summaries of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security.

Thirdly, the Council and Member States can use
all of the Council's tools to combat sexual violence in
conflict, including sanctions. Resolution 2339 (2017) on
the Central African Republic introduced the first-ever
separate designation criteria on conflict-related sexual
violence in a sanctions regime. Let us work to include
similar criteria in all relevant sanctions regimes.

Fourthly, the numbers of women peacekeepers,
police and correction officers should be increased.
The evidence for their greater inclusion is compelling.
With more female peacekeepers and female police
officers we reach the whole population in a conflict
area and become more efficient in operations. There
is a clear need for more female leaders in executive
positions. Sweden is working to meet the target of
15 per cent women military observers and staff officers
in its contingents by December 2017. Sweden actively
promotes the agenda for women and peace and security
and has had a national action plan in place for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) since 2006. In its work Sweden seeks to actively
ensure that a gender perspective is integrated into all
international operations in conflict and post-conflict
countries. That ambition must be integrated into all
peace and security efforts.

Women and peace and security is an integral part
of pre-deployment preparations for all Swedish troops,
and all deployed contingents have specially trained
gender advisers. Furthermore, the United Nations
must be trusted in order to be effective. That is why,
in this context, it is key to implement expeditiously the
Secretary-General's approach to eliminating sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by men and women
working for the United Nations.

Fifthly, a gender perspective should be integrated
throughout counter-terrorism work in line with Security
Council resolution 2242 (2015). Sexual violence,
whether it is politically or religiously motivated, is
totally unacceptable in any situation and is a crime.
In addition, resolution 2331 (2016) highlights that acts
of sexual and gender-based violence are known to be
part of the strategic objectives and ideology of certain
terrorist groups, and are used as a tactic of terrorism.

Clear political leadership is needed at all levels
to change norms in society. It can encourage female
victims of sexual violence to speak out. Indeed, we have
seen only the tip of the iceberg. Low levels of reporting
are a sign of stigma and failed systems. High numbers
are a step in the right direction towards tackling the
problem. It is important that we break the silence
regarding sexual violence in conflict, thereby making
it visible and not shameful, and making it part of peace
negotiations, reconciliation and transitional justice.

Real leadership and engagement must also come
from political leaders, military commanders, elders,
judges, community leaders, teachers and peer-to-peer
counsellors. I am proud to be a Minister in a feminist
Government. All leaders have a duty to challenge sexist
views and violent behaviour and attitudes towards
women and children. The responsibility to address and
speak up is greater for those of us in male-dominated
sectors, such as defence and security. We are working
actively within the Swedish Armed Forces to educate
our own troops as well as troops from other countries.
We are ready to share our experiences.

We cannot spare any effort in combating these evil
acts. Only by shining a light on this issue can we lift
the long shadow of sexual violence in conflict for the
survivors and prevent another generation from falling
victim. We all can, and must, improve.

