Ms. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to express our
appreciation to you, Madam President, for convening
this debate on such an important issue.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his remarks
and for his comprehensive and candid report on sexual
violence in armed conflict (S/2010/604).

We are grateful to Special Representative
Ms. Margot Wallstrom for her presentation and for her
work. Our appreciation also goes to Under-Secretary-
General Alain Le Roy and Military Adviser Lieutenant
General Babacar Gaye for their statements.

When the Council takes up issues such as sexual
violence, the challenge is how to address in political,
and even operational, terms an issue that is deeply
moral in nature. In other words, the Council is called
upon to help to translate our sorrow and outrage at
such horrific violence into practical action capable of
bringing about real change. To that end, we need an
integrated approach that combines prevention,
combating impunity and providing support to victims.

Support to national awareness-raising activities
and information campaigns that seek to break taboos
and misperceptions around the issue are particularly
important to preventive efforts. For example, as the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/604) highlights, the
myth that rape is an inevitable by-product of war is
persistent and dangerously self-fulfilling. The stigma
and silence that already hamper addressing sexual
violence in peacetime can never be allowed to prevail,
especially when such violence becomes a tactic of war.

In situations where peacekeeping operations are
deployed, the United Nations role in prevention
becomes one of particular relevance, as the enhanced
resources at its disposal create higher expectations
among local populations and in international public
opinion. In order to live up to such expectations, we
must ensure that the prevention of sexual violence is
truly made a mission-wide endeavour that involves not
only troops and police but all mission components.

Recent events have shown that contacts with
local populations are critical to ensuring protection.
The role of civil affairs and public information
components is therefore key. They should have the
necessary resources - especially guidance and trained
personnel - to be able to help avoid outrageous
violence such as that witnessed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are encouraged by the
measures being taken by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to mainstream the prevention
of sexual violence in peacekeeping missions.

Impunity tends to fuel violence. Brazil
appreciates and supports the work of Ms. Wallstrom's
Office to support national institutions in identifying
and prosecuting perpetrators. We also believe that the
Team of Experts established by resolution 1888 (2009)
can play an important role in helping States to
strengthen the rule of law in situations of particular
concern. The role of the International Criminal Court
becomes key when national jurisdictions are unable or
unwilling to exercise their primary responsibility.

The adoption of resolution 1960 (2010) today,
which Brazil is pleased to have co-sponsored, sends a
clear message that the Council is ready to continue to
fight impunity by focusing on parties that engage in
conflict-related sexual violence. It has strengthened the
tools and arrangements available to the Council and to
the United Nations as a whole. It is a significant and
concrete step towards ensuring accountability, thus
contributing to a decrease in the incidence of the
problem.

As we focus on bringing perpetrators to justice or
to face opprobrium, we cannot shirk our duty to ensure
proper support to victims. While this is fundamentally
the responsibility of States, there are several ways by
which the international community can support
national efforts in that regard. Brazil recently
contributed $1 million to the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in support of
programmes to fight sexual violence and facilitate
victims' access to justice and compensation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Dealing with sexual violence requires different
parts of the United Nations system to act on many
fronts. Today we have made progress in that direction
and concluded, on a very high note, a remarkable effort
that we began his year to provide an effective response
by the Security Council to the scourge of sexual
violence. There is certainly more to be done, but we
now have the tools and a clear road map to make
further progress in the future.

