Ms. Marinaki: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, North Macedonia,
Montenegro and Albania; the country ofthe Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union (EU) welcomes the
Franco-German joint presidency's determination to
bring the women and peace and security agenda into
the limelight of the Council and the international
community at large. This is in line with the initiatives
implemented by other EU member States during their
recent mandates in the Council. The adoption today
of resolution 2467 (2019), on conflict-related sexual
violence, is a positive step forward and we are fully
committed to playing our part in its full implementation.

Allow me to extend our gratitude to today's briefers,
whose actions and commitment are an inspiration to
all of us. On this tenth anniversary of the mandate of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, we also thank Special
Representative Pramila Patten for her dedication and
we reiterate our full support for her mandate.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/280) is
a dispiriting read, and we are sad to have to concur with
his observation that, despite some progress, impunity
for the perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence
continues to be the norm in many parts of the world.
Strengthening proper accountability for that crime is
crucial. We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
systematically and explicitly include and apply sexual
violence as a designation criterion within the relevant
United Nations sanctions regimes, particularly in cases
in which regimes overlap with perpetrators mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General.

Prevention, protection and prosecution should
be the driving forces of all efforts. With regard to
prevention, we reiterate the importance of promoting
a culture of full gender-equality and women's
empowerment; supporting women's and community-
based organizations; boosting women's participation
in political, economic and social decision-making and
peace processes; properly including men and boys
and training them to become gender champions; and
adopting national action plans for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), as key measures to prevent
conflict-related sexual violence.

Concerning protection, we insist on the urgency
of ensuring full access to comprehensive, coordinated
and quality services, including sexual and reproductive
health care, psychological support and legal
counselling, as well as relief and recovery programmes
for all survivors, without discrimination based on any
grounds, including sex, race, ethnic or social origin,
religion or belief, political or any other opinion,
disability, age, sexual orientation or gender identity.

With regard to prosecution, we recall the need
to ensure adequate investigation and prosecution
through the collection of reliable sex-disaggregated
data, facilitate access to justice for survivors and
ensure specific protection to and psychological
support for witnesses. In that context, we emphasize
the significant progress in international justice made
by the International Criminal Court (ICC), as well as
other non-permanent international criminal tribunals
and similar courts in combating conflict-related sexual
violence. The ICC's jurisdiction is complementary
to that of States, and the primary responsibility for
bringing perpetrators to justice resides with States.

We also recognize and support the important
contribution of civil society, women's organizations
and women human rights defenders who challenge
violent gender norms, prevent sexual and gender-
based Violence and provide medical and psychological
services to communities. We are particularly concerned
about the risks and harm faced by mothers and their
children born as the result of sexual violence, and
would welcome the briefers' recommendations on how
to better prevent and address such situations. We also
note that, according to the report of the Secretary-
General, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
individuals are sometimes specifically targeted with
sexual violence in conflict, and we call on the Council
to give due attention to that issue.

In the spirit of the Secretary-General's
recommendations, the European Union has taken
concrete actions to prevent and respond to conflict-
related sexual violence based on a holistic approach. I
refer to the written version of my statement circulated
in the Chamber, which details those actions, including
the encouraging examples of such cooperation in
the Western Balkans, the Caucasus, Iraq, Syria and
Afghanistan, as well as the joint United Nations-
EU Spotlight Initiative, which we invite all United
Nations Member States to join. The United Nations can
continue to rely on the full engagement and support of
the European Union to achieve our shared goals and
help millions of girls and women feel safe and free to
realize their full potential.

