Mr. Woldeyes (Ethiopia): Over the years, we have
heard a number of pronouncements from the United
Nations and the African Union and seen various
regional and national policies, strategies and action
plans, all aimed at mainstreaming gender issues. There
has been some progress registered, but despite all those
efforts, there is still a significant gap between our
aims and ambitions and the actual political support
and financial commitment provided to the women and
peace and security agenda. Much more work and real
and practical commitments are needed to bridge the
gaps in implementation and to support countries in
developing policies and strategies that align with the
agenda. We can deliver on those commitments only if
we place the prevention of violence against women, the
protection of women's rights and the full participation
of women in decision-making at the centre of national
policies. Neither peace nor prosperity can be achieved
or sustained without the equal, active and meaningful
involvement of women throughout society.

Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm Ethiopia's
commitment to promoting the women and peace and
security agenda, and to illustrate it if I may. Over the
past 18 months, Ethiopia has taken a number of bold
steps to increase the participation and representation
of women in decision-making. The Administration of
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed has attained gender parity
in the Cabinet, appointed our first woman Head of State
and assigned women as heads ofthe Supreme Court and
the National Election Board. We have also set up a new
ministry, led by a woman, with a specific mandate for
peacebuilding and oversight of the country's security
sector. In addition, we have significantly increased the
numbers of women in leadership and decision-making
positions at different levels of Government and across
public institutions. Our Constitution guarantees rights
to land use and equal rights to property acquired
during marriage.

As a leading troop-contributing country,
Ethiopia fully understands the importance of women
peacekeepers in overcoming social and cultural barriers
to build trust in the communities they serve. They
provide victims and local communities - specifically
those women and children most vulnerable to conflict
and violence - with a sense of security and confidence.
Women peacekeepers play a critical role in helping
refugees and others who have been subjected to violence
in the absence ofjustice. Victims of sexual and gender-
based violence respond more positively to their support,
which facilitates rehabilitation, justice and reparations.
In Ethiopia, we have been seeing grass-roots self-help
women's groups provide the essential support in the
national response to recent internal displacement and
resettlement, as well as in reconciliation efforts.

As we look forward to marking the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), it is high time that we recommit
ourselves to fully implementing the resolutions we have
adopted and the declarations we have made in the past.
Women must be central to policy-making, political
participation and conflict prevention. We call upon
members of the Council to use the commemoration of
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) to mobilize support and resources so as
to fully implement the women and peace and security
agenda in its entirety.

This was a shortened version of our statement. Our
full statement will be available online.

