The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In my capacity as President of the Government of
Spain, I should like to pay tribute to all those killed last
weekend in Turkey, Chad and Cameroon, as well as to
those injured who are still struggling between life and
death. My Government has strongly condemned these
terrorist attacks, and I wish to extend my condolences
to the families and express my solidarity with the
people of Turkey, Chad and Cameroon.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the following countries to participate
in this meeting: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Algeria, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women; Ms. Julienne Lusenge
and Ms. Yanar Mohammed, both of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security; and Ms. Alaa
Murabit, of Voice of Libyan Women.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principal Adviser for Gender
Issues, European External Action Service of the
European Union; and Her Excellency Ms. Bineta Diop,
Special Envoy of the Chair of the African Union, to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
representatives to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Alexander Vershbow, Deputy Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization; His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States; His Excellency Mr. Francisco
Lainez, Chief of Staff of the Assistant Secretary-
General of the Organization of American States; and
Her Excellency Ms. Miroslava Beham, Senior Adviser
on Gender Issues of the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/7l6, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.

I wish to also draw the attention ofCouncil members
to document S/2015/749, which contains a letter dated
1 October 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
Spain to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

