Ms. Zappia (Italy): I wish to thank you, Mr. President
and, of course, Germany for having dedicated today's
open debate to such an important topic.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
not only for his opening remarks but also, and above
all, for being such a formidable advocate and actor
for gender parity at the United Nations. I would also
like to thank the briefers, Major General Lund and
Ms. Merekaje, for their remarks.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

Italy, the top troop contributor in the Western
European and others Group and one of the most
generous contributors to the peacekeeping budget, is
deeply committed to improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of United Nations peacekeeping. Experience
has proved that women - be they peacekeepers, civilian
staff, gender advisers or gender experts - play a
fundamental role in enhancing the delivery of mandates
and in improving the protection of civilians, as
well as the safety and security of peacekeepers and
humanitarian actors. Therefore, we should redouble our
efforts to make United Nations peacekeeping missions
fit for women and increase their presence.

Similarly, as Minister Von der Leyen mentioned
in her remarks, it is absolutely crucial to ensure that
all efforts to strengthen the presence of women in
armed forces and peacekeeping missions be given the
maximum visibility. A strong public communications
campaign on the contribution of women to peacekeeping
must be a fundamental element of our strategy.

Italy fully supports the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and the incentives and measures planned
under the uniformed gender parity strategy, launched
by the Secretariat. During its most recent tenure on the
Security Council, Italy initiated resolution 2382 (2017),
which reaffirms the indispensable role of women
in peacekeeping.

At the national level, in recent years, Italy has put
in place a number of actions to integrate the gender
perspective at all levels and in all branches ofits military
organization. The Ministry of Defence has a Gender
Adviser, a Joint Council on Gender Perspectives and
an Equal Opportunities and Gender Perspective Unit.
Training curricula for the armed forces, Carabinieri
and Guardia di Finanza include the gender perspective
and its objectives.
As announced at the recent Peacekeeping
Ministerial, Italy is offering to all interested troop-
contributing countries and police-contributing
countries, for the current year, a new set of courses for
gender advisers, the female engagement team and on
the gender perspective. More can be done. The launch
of the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations,
as well as the establishment of the Elsie Initiative
Fund, to overcome barriers to increasing women's
meaningful participation in peacekeeping operations is
an important step in the right direction and we praise
Canada's leadership in that regard.

The Security Council has a role to play by calling
on the Secretariat, heads of missions, as well as troop-
and police-contributing countries to ensure that the
gender perspective is always duly taken into account,
addressing persistent barriers and challenges to the
deployment of women.

As Major General Lund said earlier today, Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and Force
Commanders should make every effort to promote
the active and meaningful involvement of women in
situation analysis and planning, as well as in activities
in the field, in particular those aimed at building
trust with the local population and strengthening
partnerships with local women's organizations. Indeed,
women deployed in United Nations missions should be,
first and foremost, interlocutors with the local female
population. Our experience on the ground, especially in
southern Lebanon and Afghanistan, show that whenever
there is interaction between female soldiers and the
local female population, such interaction is fruitful and
successful. In a recent case, one of our most brilliant
female soldiers of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL), building on her experience as
Chief of the Sector West Commander's close protection
team, decided to go back to Lebanon, after her term in
UNIFIL, to train the Lebanese female soldiers for the
Presidential Guard Brigade, in the framework of our
bilateral assistance to the country.

The creation of uniformed women's networks,
to be implemented by June 2020, must also be seen
as a mechanism by which to foster dialogue with
female organizations present in the host country. It
would benefit the female component of peacekeeping
operations and, at the same time, empower the women
of the host country. That comprehensive approach to
women and peacekeeping must also serve to further
advance the fight against the scourge of sexual
exploitation and abuse. Italy fully supports the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse and, during the United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial, announced a new contribution of €160,000
to the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse.

Finally, if the result of having this kind debate
can bring to the table, as I see, a majority of Council
members with women representatives, it is already a
very good result.

