Ms. Jones-Bos (Netherlands): I would first like to
congratulate the Security Council on its adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), 15 years ago, and of resolution
2242 (2015), of which we are proud to be a sponsor,
today. I would like to thank Prime Minister Rajoy
Brey and the Spanish presidency of the Council for
this chance to reaffirm the commitments we made 15
years ago to women and peace and security. I would
also like to express our appreciation for the work of
Radhika Coomaraswamy and her colleagues. They have
produced an outstanding report (S/2015/716) that shows
how right the Security Council was to adopt resolution
1325 (2000) in the first place. Wherever it has been
implemented, the thinking behind it has proved correct.

The great value of the report I have just mentioned
lies in the evidence gathered on the ground from men
and women who face the bitter reality of conflict on a
daily basis. And I salute the women who are here today
and whom we heard this morning, some from countries
such as Iraq, Libya, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Syria, Afghanistan, Yemen, the Sudan, South
Sudan, Burundi and other conflict-affected countries.
They are the true experts, and we look to them to
shape our agenda. Like the partners who came to the
Netherlands for our February conference, they shared
their stories, best practices and contributions, often
made at the risk of their own lives.

There is clear evidence that increasing political
participation by women results in better negotiations,
better and more sustainable agreements, better
governance, more wealth, distributed more equitably,
more and better conflict prevention and ultimately,
therefore, more peace and security. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands works with women's organizations
on peace, justice and development, and empowering
women and girls is crucial in all those areas. But
huge challenges remain. Conflict is still rife, and we
are confronted with ever more extreme violence. In
such situations, women do badly. And when women
do badly, the world suffers. Guns take over, and the
result is violence, impunity and spiral of more poverty
and conflict. One appalling example of that was the
assassination of one of our partners, the Libyan lawyer
Salwa Bugaighis, on 25 June 2014.

It is urgent that we break that spiral, and resolution
1325 (2000), we believe, contains the key to addressing
these challenges. The thinking behind the resolution
lies at the very heart of current Dutch policies on aid,
trade, security and human rights, and it is paramount

for our partnerships for peace, justice and development.
Before the end of this year, we will issue our third
national action plan, the product of a unique platform
on which the Government has worked with more
than 50 civil society organizations. We are providing
€4 million a year to carry out the plan, supporting
organizations on the ground that work to protect and
politically empower women in conflict situations.
We provide both diplomatic and financial support to
Syrian women's efforts to present their views on their
country's future in international forums. Women take
centre stage in our vision of the future.

But over the next 15 years, the world's fate will be
largely determined by whether or not women succeed
in taking their rightful place in history. Do we want
to achieve our global goals? Fight inequality? Create
lasting peace? We need the women ofthe world to do that.
Let us therefore all step up our support to organizations
like Karama, a regional non-governmental organization
based in Cairo that works throughout the Middle East
in coalition with hundreds of partners to end violence
against women.

Fifteen years ago, the Netherlands, as a member of
the Security Council at the time, was one of the main
advocates of resolution 1325 (2000). I was personally
involved then and feel very strongly about it. Now we
are aspiring to become a Security Council member
again, partly in order to support increasing the pace of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
successor, resolution 2242 (2015). We think we have
something to offer - the desire and the capacity to
stand up and invest in women who are the drivers of
change. It is time, as Elvis Presley put it in one of his
many classic songs, for "A little less conversation, [and]
a little more action".

