Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to warmly thank our briefers, whose
presentations and disturbing testimonies embody the
Council's profound interest in addressing the issue
of human trafficking in situations of conflict. The
poignant testimony of Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha,
who herself was a victim of atrocities committed by
Daesh, was particularly gripping and will remain fresh
in our memories.

The actions committed by Daesh in the Middle
East or by Boko Haram in Africa dramatically illustrate
the ongoing links between international peace and
security and human trafficking. Worldwide, trafficking
in human beings is, along with the traffic in drugs and
counterfeit goods, one of the most profitable forms
of trafficking. Its so-called turnover is estimated at
$32 billion dollars annually - if figures make any
sense - and it is one of the most widespread kinds of
trafficking. Forced labour, sexual servitude, kidnapping
for purposes of forced prostitution, rape - the list of
atrocities committed by terrorist groups, in particular
in situations of armed conflict, is unfortunately very
long. While the international community has invested
heavily in the issue since the turn of the century, more
efforts are crucial to defeat this scourge. I therefore
commend the initiative of the United States presidency
of the Council and to thank its delegation for giving us
the opportunity to exchange views on this issue.

For these terrorist groups, whose main victims
are usually women and children, trafficking in
human beings is not simply a means of spreading
terror among civilian populations; it is also used as a
source of financing. In Syria, women suffer the worst
atrocities. Rape, forced marriage and prostitution are
everyday occurrences in regions controlled by Daesh.
In Iraq, Daesh has established a veritable market
where women from minority groups, such as Yazidis
and Christians, are sold to serve as sex slaves. The
international commission of inquiry on human rights in
Iraq describes a system that transcends borders, where
we find Yazidi women, and even girls, with price tags
on their foreheads, for sale in the markets of Raqqa,
in Syria. In Nigeria, Boko Haram tortures, rapes and
holds prisoner hundreds of women and children.
Those acts are not only intolerable from a moral
point of view; they may also constitute war crimes,
crimes against humanity and even genocide in the
case of certain communities. These crimes must not
go unpunished. The terrorist groups that commit such
atrocities are pushing the boundaries of what it means
to be human. Faced with this, we are called to act - and
to act in the sense of protection. The need to protect
civilians is obvious, but so is the need to protect the law
and its principles.

On numerous occasions, the Council has debated
subjects closely linked with the phenomenon of human
trafficking - on the occasion of the adoption of
resolution 2195 (2014), for example, on links between
terrorism and organized crime, or more recently of
resolution 2242 (2015), on women and peace and
security. But our words must now be translated into
action. Prevention, the protection of victims and the
fight against impunity must be our priorities.

Combating human trafficking is a key priority for
France. The three pillars that I have described guide
the national action plan that France adopted in 2014
in order to curb this scourge. At the international
level, we have at our disposal pertinent international
instruments, such as the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, known as the
Palermo Convention, and its Protocols, including that
specifically dedicated to the fight against trafficking
in persons. But we need to strengthen them and ensure
their full implementation by the entire international
community. It is to that end that France argues especially
for the establishment of a review mechanism to verify
and facilitate the implementation of these instruments.
We also contribute to the Global Programme against
Trafficking in Persons of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, whose remarkable work I commend.

Finally, as it did at the International Conference
on the Victims of Ethnic and Religious Violence in
the Middle East, held in Paris on 8 September, France
will continue to mobilize the international community
each time it has opportunity to do so. When we learn of
crimes as horrific as the ones we have heard testimony
about today, we have a collective responsibility to
act to end them and to prosecute their perpetrators.
The Council can be assured that France will be fully
mobilized to that end.

