Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks. Allow me also to
thank Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe, President of the
Economic and Social Council, for his statement, and
also Under-Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet for
her briefing and her leadership on the pressing issues
before us.

Today the Council takes up a debate that is very
important to the Jewish State and the Jewish people.
Our sages often remind us of the story of Miriam, who
was Moses' sister and Judaism's first female prophet.
As the Jewish people wandered through the desert for
40 years, Miriam sustained them with a well that
supplied fresh and plentiful water. Upon her death, the
well dried up and disappeared. The message of her
story is very clear. Empowered women are the life
source for thriving communities. Prosperity comes
when society ensures that women are allowed to lead;
it evaporates when their rights are restricted.

Those principles have been an integral part of the
State of Israel since its inception. Gender equality is
enshrined in our 1948 Declaration of Independence. It
has been implemented through law and public policy,
starting with a landmark and comprehensive piece of
legislation in 1951, known as the Women's Equal
Rights Law. More than 40 years ago, Golda Meir
became Israel's Prime Minister - making my country
just the third in the world to elect a woman to its
highest office.

This year, the Israeli parliament enacted a new
law as part of our implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), requiring that all Government investigative
committees include an appropriate representation of
women. By law, women must be included on Israeli
negotiating teams. Maybe that will move a few things
forward.

In a region where women are too often excluded
from public life, Israeli women stand out as leaders in
law, politics, mediation and conflict prevention and
resolution. The opposition in the Israeli parliament is
headed by a woman, Tzipi Livni. She also led the
Israeli negotiating team with the Palestinians as the
former Foreign Minister, and my former boss. Another
woman, Shelly Yachimovich, was recently elected to
lead the Israeli Labour party.

In Israel, we take pride in the fact that
approximately half of our internationally renowned
judiciary is made up of women, including our Supreme
Court, which is lead by Justice Dorit Beinish. Women
also occupy senior positions in our defence
establishment. This year Major General Orna Barbivai
made history when she was elevated to the second-
highest rank in the Israel Defense Forces.

As part of our commitment to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), Israel's Government holds
workshops to promote dialogue between Israeli and
Palestinian women at the Mount Carmel International
Training Center in Haifa. More than 650 Israeli and
Palestinian women have participated in more than 20
workshops over the past eight years. Such seminars
provide women with the tools and understanding
needed to promote peace and non-violence. A wide
range of similar projects are now under way in Israel.

We must recognize the clear connection between
advancing peace and advancing equal rights for
women. Across many corners of the Middle East today,
women are prohibited from driving, voting, receiving
inheritances, getting an education and travelling alone
in public. The subjugation of women in our region
cannot be ignored; it is a major obstacle to creating
real understanding between cultures and to building
sustainable peace.

Peace begins at home. Children learn the values
of tolerance and understanding, first and foremost,
from those who raise them - usually from their
mothers. We must recognize that when women are
subjugated and denied access to education, these
important values are damaged and lost. Empowered
women hold together healthy families, build strong
societies and serve as the most important bridges to
other cultures.

Peace in the Middle East and around the world
depends on empowering women and ensuring their
equal rights. Women can and should lead the way to
peace, but they must be given opportunities to sit in the
driver's seat. The international community has a duty
to remove the obstacles from their path, so that we all
can build the foundation for a brighter future.

