Mr. Grant (Canada): I am honoured to speak on
behalf of Canada in this debate on the role of women in
the prevention and resolution of conflict in Africa. We
see this debate as an important and logical initiative
aimed at giving meaning in the African context to the
international women and peace and security agenda in
the immediate aftermath of the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

(spoke in French)

In October, the United Nations marked that
anniversary with a high-level review on the
implementation of the resolution and the launch of the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which provides us with a complete view of what
has been accomplished on the women and peace and
security agenda and outlines what work remains to
be done.

Canada believes that the case for the role of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflict has been
well made. Gender equality, the empowerment of
women and girls as agents of peace and development,
full respect for their human rights and protection from,
and responding to, sexual violence are now accepted
as prerequisites for sustainable peace and prosperity.
The work remaining is to apply those principles on the
ground, including with respect to conflicts in Africa,
which is our topic today.

(spoke in English)

Canada commends the work of the African Union in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda by
creating policies and mechanisms such as the African
Union Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, the
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa and

the Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
Policy Framework. The African Union's appointment
of the Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security
in 2014 is another positive step towards increased and
equal participation by women in peace operations.
Canada also applauds the African Union's continuing
commitment to women's issues with a thematic focus
on "Women's empowerment and development" in 2015
and "Human rights with special focus on the rights of
women" in 2016.

While it is important to include women and women's
groups in high-level processes to prevent and resolve
major conflicts, it is equally important to empower
women at the local level. As just one example, I cite the
remarkable Jos Declaration of 2014 by the women of
the city of Jos in Plateau state, Nigeria. As part of the
broader Jos inter-communal dialogue process, inspired
women from across communities that had been in
conflict for some 20 years came together to address
the causes of conflict, commit to continuing action to
resolve the differences and make firm recommendations
to the Government and local councils of elders on the
way ahead. Canada is humbled by the courage of those
women and honoured to have been able to support
their journey.

Canada also supports projects in Africa to address
the specific needs of women and girls in conflict and
emergencies. We are mounting a strong response to
sexual violence in conflicts in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the African Great Lakes region. Our
programming includes providing access to justice
for survivors and holding perpetrators to account,
including through the deployment of experts from
Justice Rapid Response.

(spoke in French)

Canada's national action plan on women and peace
and security focuses and guides Canadian interventions
in conflict and post-conflict situations to ensure that
women and men are treated equally and with dignity and
that women are always afforded full participation. On
International Women's Day this year, the Government
announced that our action plan will be renewed, which
is a sure sign of Canada's continued commitment to
advancing the role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution, including in Africa. Canada looks forward
to continuing to work with all those who are dedicated
to ending conflict in Africa and to including women in
those efforts.

