Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to join other
members, Madam President, in thanking you for
convening this important meeting. I would also like
to thank the briefers, and particularly Major General
Kristin Lund for her championing of the cause of
women peacekeepers. Our women peacekeepers have
been working closely with her and I urge her to continue
that good work.

I also want to commend and welcome the newly
launched gender-parity strategy for uniformed
personnel, which aims to double the number of women
in military and police contingents by 2020 and beyond.
Through resolution 2242 (2015), the Security Council
and the Secretariat have shown us a good example of
how they can work together to improve the meaningful
participation of women in peacekeeping. Building
on that effort, Indonesia would like to highlight the
following points.

The first is about the importance ofa strong national
regulatory framework. At the national level, in 2015
our Government issued a ministerial decree on a road
map vision for the period from 2015 to 2019 of 4,000
peacekeepers that established the legal framework
for our aspiration to deploy up to 4,000 Indonesian
personnel in peacekeeping operations. It was updated
in 2017 to include a more comprehensive strategy
aimed at increasing women's meaningful participation
in peacekeeping. The road map outlined detailed steps
and checklists for action to be taken on a yearly basis
from 2015 to 2019. For this year in particular, we are
deepening our focus on the required skill sets, in
accordance with the missions' needs in the field, and
we are intensifying our efforts to increase the numbers
of female peacekeepers at United Nations Headquarters
and in missions.

The second is about the political will to build
capacity and pledge more women for deployment. More
than 3,000 Indonesian peacekeepers, including 86
female personnel, are currently serving in eight United
Nations peacekeeping missions. That figure puts
Indonesia in the top eight contributing countries and
makes it the number-one troop-contributing country
among Security Council members. We also hope it will
increase our ranking in terms of women peacekeepers
deployed. To encourage and prepare more of its able
female peacekeepers, Indonesia has incorporated
the issue of gender in United Nations peacekeeping
as part of the regular curriculum at its peacekeeping
training centre in West Java. In order to increase our
contribution, we are currently in the process of sending
one formed police unit of 140 personnel, including
14 women police officers, to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, as well as 81 individual
police officers vetted by the United Nations Selection
Assistance and Assessment Team process, 26 of whom
are women police officers, who will be deployed to
various missions. We are also exploring the possibility
of including more female personnel in other recently
pledged units, such as military police companies,
explosive-ordnance-disposal and counter-improvised-
explosive-device teams, aeromedical evacuation teams
and transportation companies. In short, there are no
fields that should be closed to women, because they can
do everything.

The third is that a sound strategy is imperative.
We are mindful of the challenges. More often than not,
missions' infrastructure renders peacekeeping less
attractive to female personnel. In addition, we also face
the reality of structural and sociocultural challenges that
should be minimized or removed altogether, whether
at the United Nations, in missions or in contributing
countries. Adequate resources should be made
available. Troop costs should be adequate to meeting
the specific needs of female peacekeepers, supporting
much-needed predeployment training, the provision
of advanced gender-sensitive equipment and facilities
and the creation of a receptive environment for women
personnel in missions. I heard all of that in talking to
our women peacekeepers in the field. That is what they
need, as I think Major General Lund knows very well.
Indonesia will work to incorporate those perspectives
into the cost data to be collected and considered in the
context of the next troop-costs review.

We also welcome new initiatives to enhance
training and capacity-building in order to improve and
build the capacity of female personnel. As was already
mentioned, on 8 and 9 April Mrs. Retno Marsudi,
Indonesia's Minister for Foreign Affairs, hosted a
regional meeting in Djakarta on women and peace and
security with the intention of creating a global network
of peacekeepers, starting from a regional base. The
understanding is that women as agents of peace have
an important role to play in peacekeeping operations.
Female peacekeepers possess better situational
awareness, provide a sense of comfort and protection
for civilians in dealing with sexual and gender-based
violence, and are able to communicate with children
harmed by conflicts. In short, they can win the
hearts and minds of local communities and civilians.
Mrs. Marsudi has also floated the idea of establishing a
global coalition of women for peace and tolerance made
up of female peacekeepers and women negotiators and
mediators. It is high time for women to be more visible
and in the forefront in carrying the banners of peace.

In conclusion, we agree with the Secretary-
General's point that there is clear evidence showing
that a greater number of women peacekeepers
leads to better protection responses and can make
significant differences. Indonesia believes that women
peacekeepers can do anything, anytime, anywhere
for the cause of peace. Moreover, with reference to
what my brother the Ambassador of the Dominican
Republic mentioned, when he remarked that peace has
a woman's face, I should like to add that peace also has
a woman's touch.

