Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): I would like to thank
the United Kingdom for its ongoing leadership on the
issue ofwomen and peace and security. I also commend
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate of
the Council on sexual violence in conflict.

The Solomon Islands agrees that sexual violence is
widespread in conflicts and is often used as a tool to
deliberately humiliate opponents. A number of Council
resolutions speak to that, particularly resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), as well as
resolution 1325 (2000). It is also correct to say that
the vast majority of victims and survivors of sexual
violence do not see justice come their way.

Turning to the purposes of this debate - to examine
the mechanisms and processes by which countries
have dealt with the victims and survivors of sexual
violence - I would like to share some ofthe experience
of the Solomon Islands in dealing with victims of
sexual violence during and after a period of conflict.
The Solomon Islands went through an ethnic conflict
between 1998 and 2000. In 2009, with the support ofthe
United Nations, and particularly of Australia, currently
a member of the Security Council, the Solomon Islands
established a Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
The Commission provided a mechanism for the
victims' stories to be heard and for efforts to be made to
restore the dignity of survivors of that ethnic conflict,
including those who had been sexually violated, with the
Commission listening in compassion and respect and
providing a space for expression in a traditional society
where shame and humiliation often prevent victims
from coming forward. The Commission, established
by law in the Solomon Islands, has since presented its
findings and recommendations to my Government.

Secondly, while primary responsibility in this
area lies with States, I would like to underscore that
in 2003, at the invitation of the Government of the
Solomon Islands, a regional assistance mission, as
provided for under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and led by Australia and strongly
supported by New Zealand and all the Pacific small
island developing States, was deployed to the Solomon
Islands. The mission, which included military, police
and civilian components, undertook peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and peacemaking initiatives. One of its
roles was to strengthen the country's security apparatus
and address gaps in the system, including regional
support for strengthening the rule of law, such as
institutional training of police and corrections officers
and building court infrastructure and police stations
all over the country. That support has enabled the
Solomon Islands to conduct a strong campaign aimed
at protecting victims and dealing with perpetrators of
gender violence, while working with all the relevant
stakeholders. We have a policy in place and are now
holding consultations on a draft bill on gender violence
that we hope will address our high rates of gender
violence.

I would like to say that the regional assistance
mission is now in a transitional phase. After 10 years
of its regional partnership with a post-conflict country
such as ours, our economy has grown and stability has
been maintained. The mission's military component
will be withdrawn this year. The regional Pacific police
force will shift into more of an advisory role, and other
components of the partnership will slowly be absorbed
into bilateral assistance with various partners.

The role of UN-Women in combating sexual
Violence remains important, but its task in the Pacific
is challenging. It has one inter-country office managing
13 countries. We continue to push for it to establish
itselfin more countries in the region.

Finally, to answer the question posed in the concept
paper (S/2013/335, annex) - yes, the Solomon Islands
and the Pacific have a story to tell and a model that tries
to address the issue of sexual violence comprehensively
through regional cooperation. I would like to close
by stating that sustainable peace and stability can
be achieved only through embracing all three pillars
of sustainable development, and by addressing the
security threats connected to climate change by calling
for stronger mitigation targets to avoid the possibility
that the world will reach a point of no return. Failing
that, the threats we see today will continue to increase
as States' capacity to respond will become more
challenging.

