Ms. Anywar: I represent the Women's Initiatives
for Gender Justice, where I work as a legal monitor
in our Ugandan programme assessing the progress
and challenges in establishing an effective national
mechanism to try conflict-related crimes, including
sexual violence, in the Ugandan context.

The Women's Initiatives for Gender Justice is an
international women's human rights organization that
advocates for gender justice through the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and domestic mechanisms.
In addition, we also advocate for the participation of
women and the integration of gender provisions within
peace processes and reconciliation efforts from the
perspective of victims/survivors and women's rights
activists in armed conflict situations.

The paucity of domestic prosecutions for crimes
of sexual violence, the limited volume of international
prosecutions for these crimes and the scale worldwide of
crimes of sexualized Violence, particularly in situations
of armed conflict, continue to leave an impunity gap
so distinct that in recent years it has become the focus
of several Security Council resolutions. The attention
given by the Council to sexual violence is necessary
and urgent, and with developments such as the United
Kingdom's Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative, the
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the work of the International Criminal
Court, attention to this issue is becoming increasingly
strategic.

Over the past 27 years, northern Uganda and several
of its neighbouring countries, including South Sudan,
the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have been subjected to armed
conflict, instability, displacement of the population
and widespread and brutal forms of sexual and gender-
based crimes committed by a range of perpetrators,
including armed forces, militia groups and the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA).

In the past decade of our work, the Women's
Initiatives for Gender Justice has worked with thousands
of victims/survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence and monitored accountability for such crimes
in several conflict or post-conflict countries. With more
than 6,000 grass-roots members and partners within
armed conflict situations, we are aware of the demand
from local communities for a reduction in impunity
and more frequent domestic trials for perpetrators
responsible for committing sexual Violence and other
grave crimes. Drawing on all of this work, there are
three observations I would like to offer today regarding
accountability for sexual violence in armed conflicts.

The first is that it is well documented that the
commission of rape and other forms of sexual violence
intensify and increase during times of civil war and
armed conflicts, and yet too often impunity for these
crimes continues to be guaranteed through amnesty
laws. Let me provide an example from Uganda.

Under the Ugandan Amnesty Act of 2000,
complete amnesty was extended to members of the
LRA on the condition that they report to a designated
area, surrender their weapons and make a declaration
renouncing and abandoning involvement in the war
or armed rebellion. Unfortunately, there were no
conditions regarding truth-telling; individuals were not
required to make a full declaration of the acts they had
committed or the incidents they might have witnessed;
and no crimes, including sexual violence, were
excluded from qualification under the amnesty regime.
Victims did not even receive an apology through this
process. The granting of amnesty guaranteed impunity
and therefore did not shift the stigma of shame away
from the survivors to the perpetrators of these crimes.
The pardoning facility under the Amnesty Act was
dissolved last year, but while in existence, it provided
blanket immunity from prosecution for sexual violence
and other crimes for the entire period of the Ugandan
LRA conflict.

The second observation we would like to make is
that leadership on accountability for conflict-related
crimes, including sexual Violence, must be provided
at the national level, with priority given to resourcing,
adequate legislation prohibiting acts of sexual violence
and capacity-building for police, investigators, lawyers
and judges regarding the adjudication of these crimes.
The inclusion of credible national prosecutions for
conflict-related crimes, including acts of sexual
violence, within the basket of accountability and
reconciliation initiatives is crucial for locating justice
in proximity to victims. Just as crucial is that domestic
courts prosecuting these international crimes do so in
compliance with the established international standards.

Let me again draw on our experience in Uganda.
In 2011, the International Crimes Division within
Uganda became operational, with the jurisdiction to
prosecute war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide in compliance with the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. The creation of that
domestic war crimes court was welcomed by large
sections of the community, in particular women's
rights and peace advocates, who described the court
as comforting for victims and a milestone in raising
hopes and expectations for the realization ofjustice and
meaningful peace.

Since then, the Ugandan court has adopted some
of the procedures practiced by the ICC, including the
use of redacted statements to support witness safety
in proceedings and in the practices regarding the
disclosure of evidence. These processes are new under
the Ugandan rules of procedure and are helping to
strengthen the understanding that successful witness
and victim protection is at the core of any efficient
investigation and prosecution.

However, there are also challenges at the national
level when attempting to prosecute conflict-related
crimes, including sexual violence. These can include
lack of jurisdiction for the prosecution of war crimes and
crimes against humanity, perhaps a lack of familiarity
of the judiciary with the provisions relating to sexual
violence, ongoing myths regarding sexualized violence
and, sometimes, one-sided prosecutions depending
on the outcome of the conflict. There can also be
challenges related to the practice and administration of
justice, and in Uganda, this has meant a lack of court
reporters, professional interpreters and the management
of transcripts.

Some of these issues are resource and capacity-
related, which leads me to my third observation, which
is that the scale of sexual violence crimes committed
during armed conflict is beyond the capacity of any
national judicial system to address on its own.

Domestic efforts must be complemented by
effective international prosecutions; United Nations
interventions empowered to engage militias and other
perpetrators of these crimes; effective protection
mechanisms for civilians, including those targeting
sexual violence; cooperative regional bodies; and,
above all, compliance by the United Nations and
Member States with their collective resolutions and
recommendations on security, women, peace and the
prevention of and response to acts of sexual violence.

Implementing the existing resolutions regarding
the commission of sexual violence in armed conflict,
highlighting its impact on those targeted by these
crimes, especially girls and women, and addressing the
purpose of this particular form of violence are essential
steps for effecting change in this crisis.

