Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would like to commend your country, Peru,
Mr. President, for including this important issue of
sexual violence in conflicts around the world on our
agenda during its presidency.

The delegation of Cote d'Ivoire would like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for her
briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250). We also
thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Under-Secretary-General
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Razia Sultana,
Senior Researcher of Kaladan Press, for their briefings.
We thank Ms. Sultana for the important information
she provided on the situation of women in Myanmar.

The issue before us this morning offers the Security
Council the opportunity to debate, once again, the issue
ofthe important role of women in the peace and security
agenda around the world. My country shares the View
of experts that the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war represents a serious attack on the physical and
moral integrity of its victims and is serious breach of
society's moral values. Women and girls living in areas
of instability are affected in an alarming way by sexual
and gender-based violence. Such violence, which is
usually perpetrated with the clear aim of impacting
the identity and dignity of its victims, has disastrous
consequences for them physically, psychologically and
economically, as well as repercussions for peace and
social cohesion.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual Violence (S/2018/250),
sexual violence is used by the warring parties as a
strategy of war and terrorism against communities. It
is increasingly a lucrative activity, fueling conflicts
and terrorism. Unfortunately, rape, which is often
collective, sexual slavery, forced prostitution and many
other forms of sexual violence are tactics to force people
or entire communities to flee their place of residence,
leaving behind them their property to the benefit of
their aggressors.

That worrisome situation, which seriously
undermineshumanrightsandinternationalhumanitarian
law, has justified the international community and
the Security Council taking robust measures to deal
with that challenge. In that regard, it is important to
underscore the relevant provisions of resolution 1820
(2008), which recognizes that sexual Violence is a tactic
of war that demands an appropriate security response.
It is also worth recalling the provisions of resolution
2331 (2016), which links human trafficking, sexual
violence and terrorism and, at the same time, calls for
psychological, medical and legal measures, inter alia,
as part of the reparations to which victims are entitled.
Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that an appropriate
response to the problem of conflict-related sexual
violence includes the increased participation of women
in collective research and peacebuilding efforts,
since, as resolution 1325 (2000) underscores, women
significantly contribute to peacekeeping in their
community and nation. In that connection, it remains
essential to increase our efforts for the inclusion,
leadership and protection of women with a view to
ensuring social cohesion and lasting peace.

Following the post-election crisis in 2010 and 2011,
in March 2012 C6te d'Ivoire was listed in the annex
to the report of Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2012/33). It was delisted on 15 April
2017 in the light of the positive developments in the
country with regard to stability and peacebuilding.
That outcome is the result of the significant efforts of
the Ivorian Government, which, since the end of the
crisis, has made the fight against sexual violence a
priority by implementing a national strategy to combat
gender-based violence, in addition to the existing
legal mechanisms.

In order to fight against this scourge, a national
committee to combat conflict-related sexual violence
was set up by decree. The committee seeks to strengthen
the legislative framework by establishing a specific
provision for the repression of rape. In the same way,
the ownership of such efforts by the Government at
the highest level of the ranks of the Forces armees
dc Cote d'Ivoire clearly demonstrated its relevance
in fighting against the scourge. Such ownership has
led, among other things, to the higher ranks making
specific commitments to train their staff on the issue of
sexual violence.

Issues of sexual violence, both in times of peace
and of conflict, have now become an integral part of
the training modules of training centres and military
academies in Cote d'lvoire. The revised code of
conduct of the Forces armees de Cote d'Ivoire also
places a particular emphasis on crimes related to
sexual violence. In addition, the recruitment of women
to positions of responsibility in areas previously
reserved for men, in particular the defence sector, has
contributed to the effectiveness of the steps taken by the
Government with regard to the scourge. Thus, following
the implementation of the Government's strategy and
other initiatives, such as the many awareness-raising
and training sessions, the number of documented cases
of sexual violence decreased from 478 in 2012 to 30 in
2014, 3 in 2015 and none in 2017.

My country welcomes the synergy of action
between the Ivoirian Government and the United
Nations system, brought about by the establishment
in 2015 of the joint mechanism of the Forces armees
de C6te d'Ivoire and the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire to follow up on human rights violations.
In addition, that comprehensive cooperation has also
resulted in technical assistance being provided by the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict as part of the action
plan of the Forces armees de Cote d'Ivoire, whose
implementation led to, inter alia, the establishment of
specialized police units. Thanks to all those efforts,
today the Forces armees de Cote d'Ivoire are the first
and only entity to be have been delisted from the annex
to the report of the Secretary-General on conflict-
related sexual violence.

Moreover, our national social cohesion programme,
which was implemented in 2012 and includes a gender
dimension, resulted in the establishment of six posts
between 2015 and 2017 dedicated to the role of women
in peacebuilding in the western and central western
regions of the country, which were affected very
harshly by conflict in the past. That approach has had a
major impact in terms of the provision of psychosocial
support for victims of sexual violence and conflict.

Notwithstanding the important progress achieved,
my country remains aware of the remaining challenges
with respect to the sensitive issue of reparations for
sexual violence committed during the post-electoral
crisis. Cote d'Ivoire would like to reaffirm its
determination to conclude investigations into cases
already identified and to support the victims, especially
through actions undertaken and led by the Ministry for
Women, Child Protection and Solidarity. Furthermore,
in the context ofpreventing and deterring the new forms
that sexual violence might take in times of peace, the
Ivorian Government intends to continue those efforts
and to make them a priority. That includes retaining the
zero-tolerance policy currently in place in the Ivorian
security and defence forces.

I cannot conclude my remarks without reiterating
the gratitude of my country to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and her team for their excellent work and efforts to
support the Ivorian Government in its fight against this
phenomenon. Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms not only its full
readiness and willingness to share its experience but
also to take up lessons learned from successes achieved
elsewhere, with a View to strengthening the resilience
of its people as well as existing legal and institutional
frameworks, including better addressing issues related
to gender-based sexual violence. In that regard, my
country welcomes next June's experience-sharing and
lessons-learned mission to Colombia, supported by the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, with a View to taking inspiration from the
successful experiences of that country with regard to
victim compensation and reparations for victims of
sexual violence in conflict.

