Mr. Muita (Kenya): I have the honour to
participate in today's debate. At the outset, let me
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing and presiding over this debate. I also thank
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Mr. Alain Le Roy, Ms. Ines
Alberdi and Ms. Sarah Taylor for their insightful
statements.

The special focus of today's debate on women's
equal participation and full involvement in all efforts
for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security could not have come at a better time. I believe
that we must make concrete and specific efforts to
advance the inclusion and participation of women in
conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping,
disarmament and security sector reform.

Kenya welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2008/622), which offers useful
recommendations on accelerating the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is now
eight years since we adopted that landmark resolution.
Commendable progress has been made through the
efforts of Member States, the United Nations system
and civil society. Nevertheless, much remains to be
done. Each forward step requires rethinking of the next
as progress continues. We must therefore continue to
work together by taking concrete measures in all areas
and at all levels. That is in the interest of all peoples.

Women's contributions, both in the domestic
arena and in the paid workforce, constitute crucial
contributions to national economies. It is always
women who are severely and negatively affected by
war and other conflict situations. Very often, they have
no real say in peace negotiations, justice processes,
peacebuilding and reconstruction, or securing domestic
stability and humanitarian assistance. It is therefore
crucial that we collectively address the structural and
institutional impediments to women's equal
participation and full involvement. In that regard, it is
important that more women be appointed to senior
positions at United Nations Headquarters and in field
missions.

Towards the end of its sixty-second session, the
General Assembly made a bold move to adopt a draft
resolution that included a general United Nations
gender architecture. I believe that, when that structure
is finally in place, it will remove the systemic
impediments that have hampered women's
participation in high-level decision-making and their
involvement in peace initiatives.

At the national level, Kenya recognizes the
centrality of gender equality and the critical role that
women can play in the maintenance and promotion of
peace and security. Our national policy on gender and
development incorporates and integrates women into
the mainstream of decision-making through regulatory
and institutional reform. That is further complemented
by the presidential decree of 2006 that reserved for
women 30 per cent of all appointments, recruitment
and promotions in the public sector. Those efforts to
enhance the participation and involvement of women
have started to bear fruit. Women are increasingly
assuming leadership roles in many areas, especially the
judicial, legislative and electoral sectors.

The beginning of this year was a particularly
difficult period for Kenya following the post-election
violence in January and February. Women and girls
were particularly affected. Quick action by the
Government, with the help of the United Nations and
the greater international community, averted further
deterioration of the situation. In the subsequent
mediation process, women leaders participated as
principal negotiators on both sides of the political
divide. Two of those women are now serving as senior
Cabinet ministers in the Grand Coalition Government.

In conclusion, I reaffirm once again my
delegation's unequivocal support for the equal
participation and full involvement of women in the
maintenance and promotion of sustainable peace. We
hope to see more women participating fully in the
process of decision-making in matters relating to their
needs and concerns.

