Ms. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to express my Government's
satisfaction about the fact that the Security Council has
continued to address this important issue. I would also
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
convene this open debate, on the fourth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2004), on the subject
of women and peace and security. This is an
exceedingly important subject, as it leads us to take up
critical areas of the Beijing Platform for Action dealing
with women and armed conflict. It also leads us to
address efforts aimed at the maintenance of
international peace and security, which is the primary
role of the Council.

The Government of El Salvador would like to
reiterate its concern about the fact that civilians - and
especially women, children and older persons -
continue to suffer from the devastating consequences
of armed conflict, including as refugees and internally
displaced persons. As we all know, that has a grave
impact on lasting peace and reconciliation.

The experience of the people of El Salvador with
armed conflict during more than a decade enables us
today to be able to pass on some lessons learned
associated with the subject under discussion. Among
those lessons, we wish to point out that women are a
basic pillar in maintaining family cohesion, struggling
for daily existence, keeping a clear focus on their
children's priority needs, passing on values and life
experiences and becoming the person who establishes
spaces for dialogue and agreement, thereby making her
the one who can most accurately identify possible
areas of intolerance.

The Government of El Salvador would like to
emphasize that it is important and necessary for women
to participate comprehensively and on an equal footing
in all initiatives designed to maintain and promote
peace and security, as well as in United Nations
peacekeeping and peace-building efforts. It is therefore
essential that we promote and strengthen women's
participation in the decision-making processes
associated with the prevention and resolution of
conflict. Similarly, we believe it essential for women to
have access to information channels in order that they
may be able to identify potential sources of violence,
open up new spaces for dialogue among society and
instil the values of tolerance and peace, which are
essential if peace is to last.

My delegation would like to point out that, for
peace to be genuine, women must be able to benefit
from peace dividends. In our opinion, this is one of the
most important lessons we have learned, because
women are capable of looking beyond their individual
interests to focus on priorities that strengthen the
family and its surroundings, very often at the expense
of their own needs.
The Government of El Salvador supports the
initiatives designed to incorporate a gender perspective
in peacekeeping operations. For this reason, we
welcome the decision of the Security Council, set out
in resolution 1325 (2000), to give all peacekeeping
personnel specialized training in the area of protection,
special needs and the human rights of women, children
and the elderly in conflict situations.

In this regard, we urge the Security Council to
draw on the accumulated experience and specialized
expertise in gender issues of the relevant institutions of
the United Nations. In particular, we would like to
refer here to the United Nations International Research
and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women,
as well as the successful experiences of each and every
Member State.

At the same time, we urge the Secretary-General
to continue his efforts to broaden the role and
contributions of women to United Nations operations,
both on the ground and at Headquarters. This would
apply in particular to military observers, civilian police
and personnel working on the promotion and protection
of human rights and humanitarian tasks.

In conclusion, allow me once again to state that
the Government of El Salvador is ready to continue
supporting all the initiatives and measures taken by the
Security Council to promote a gender perspective and
the advancement of women. It is also willing to
contribute to actions designed to protect and promote
the rights of women in conflict situations, giving them
scope to participate in the long-term process of
reconciliation - the only thing that can guarantee a
new form of coexistence within countries.

