Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): My delegation
appreciates the convening of this debate, which
provides an opportunity for us to focus our attention on
the protection of the rights of women and girls, in
particular in situations of armed conflict and their
aftermath. I would also like to take this opportunity,
Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency.

Resolution 1325 (2000) has promoted greater
awareness across the United Nations system and the
international community about those most vulnerable
to sexual and physical harm as well as social,
economic and political disempowerment in conflict and
post-conflict situations. The international community
must work together to effectively put an end to those
most vicious and inhumane forms of gender-based
exploitation. We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendations.

The empowerment of women is one of the most
effective mechanisms for their protection. My country,
Sri Lanka, ratified the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
28 years ago, and has taken proactive steps to fully
implement its provisions through national legislation.
Our Constitution itself protects women's rights. We
have also adopted a women's charter that embodies the
principles of the Convention and provides for women's
participation in peacebuilding through community-
based programmes. Sri Lanka has also established a
Ministry of Women's Affairs, which spearheads
national programmes for the advancement of women
and the protection of their rights. Our penal code lists
rape as a serious offence punishable with rigorous
imprisonment, not exceeding 20 years, and provides
for the offender to pay compensation to the victim,
consistent with the determination of a court of law.

We also note with appreciation the report
(S/2009/465) of the Secretary-General to the Council
in pursuance of resolution 1820 (2008). We note with
concern the continued use of sexual violence against
civilians, widely and systematically, in particular
against women and girls in armed conflicts and their
aftermath.
Sri Lanka was embroiled in an armed conflict
against a brutal terrorist group for 27 years. That
conflict ended in May of this year with the defeat of
that terrorist group. Throughout their campaign to
defeat those terrorists, our security forces maintained
the highest discipline. We can proudly report that we
are not among the countries that the Secretary-
General's report lists where grave sexual offences are

reported to have been committed by security forces
against civilians caught in armed conflict and its
aftermath. In fact, no allegations of rape were made
against our security forces as they successfully
advanced against those terrorists.

It is also noteworthy that none of the mandate
holders of the United Nations has found any evidence
of such offences having been committed by our armed
forces during that campaign. One of the factors that
may have contributed to that record is the training
provided with the assistance of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the prompt action
taken whenever allegations were made.

I would like to cite for the benefit of the Council
the case of Krishanti Kumaraswamy, a 16-year-old
schoolgirl who was raped and murdered by 6 soldiers
on 7 August 1996, 13 years ago. Our Government
launched an investigation into the case. The six
soldiers involved were arrested, prosecuted and given
the maximum sentence of life imprisonment. I cite that
incident to illustrate the fact that strong and definitive
action against those responsible for committing acts of
sexual violence serves as a deterrent. In that context, it
is deeply regretted that reference has been made to
Sri Lanka, including it among countries where rape is
alleged to have been used as a tactic of war. In fact, not
even the terrorist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam,
despite their tendency to exaggerate incidents for
propaganda purposes, made such an allegation against
the security forces of Sri Lanka as they advanced to
eliminate them.

We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation that equal attention be given to sexual
violence in all situations of concern where it is
perpetrated against civilians, and that the United
Nations remain engaged to take on a greater global
advocacy role on the issue of sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations. We also strongly
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General's
that increased participation of women in post-conflict
governance and reconstruction should be ensured.

My delegation also welcomes the high-level
ministerial meeting planned for next year to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000).

