Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate Uruguay for convening
today's important open debate on a topic that is
inextricably linked to international peace and security.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, Special Adviser Adama Dieng and
Ms. Mina Jaf for their briefings.

Italy aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group
of Friends on Women and Peace and Security.

In today's conflicts, civilians are increasingly
caught in the crossfire. Conflict-related sexual violence
is used to cause displacement, affect reproduction and
ethnicity, deter opposition, offer troop incentives and
undermine social and community cohesion. In recent
years, concerns about the use of sexual violence have
increased in two specific instances. First, there is the
widespread and systematic use of sexual violence
by terrorist and violent extremist groups. Secondly,
the increase in flows of people fleeing from conflict
has increased migrants' risk of falling prey to human
traffickers, including by being a victim of sexual abuse
and exploitation.

As recognized in resolutions 2242 (2015) and
2331 (2016), conflict-resolution and counter-terrorism
strategies must include measures to protect and
empower women and girls. We need to better implement
the instruments we already have to decisively prevent
sexual violence, render accountable those responsible
and provide assistance to victims.

Sexual and gender-based violence is not inevitable.
Prevention begins in times of peace with a strong legal
framework and solid institutions. It also begins by
effectively using readily available tools, such as the
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, which
we have supported since its inception. It is aimed at
identifying and preventing atrocity crimes by using
early warning indicators, such as sexual violence.

Prevention will fail if there are no consequences
to the crimes. Conflict-related sexual violence cannot
be pardoned. The international community has taken
increasing steps to put an end to impunity, and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) is crucial to
that effort. The Statute of the ICC expressly lists
various forms of sexual and gender-based crimes as
underlying acts of both crimes against humanity and
war crimes. The establishment by the ICC Prosecutor
of accountability for sexual violence as one of its key
strategic goals and the historic verdict of the ICC in the
case against Jean-Pierre Bemba are steps in the right
direction. We must continue to empower international
criminal legal bodies when national jurisdictions fail or
are unable to deliver justice.

Similarly, we must strengthen accountability in
cases of systematic gross violations by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh, including sexual and
gender-based violence, sexual slavery, abduction and
human trafficking, as in the case, for example, of the
Yazidi population. We agree that the Security Council,
in its relevant sanctions committees and subsidiary
bodies, should expand designation criteria for the
perpetrators of sexual violence in the context of armed
conflict or terrorism. We successfully included such a
clause in resolution 2339 (2017), on the Central African

Republic, earlier this year.

Building national capacities is also central to
strengthening training in order to address such crimes.
That is what we are doing through the Centre of
Excellence for Stability Police Units in Vicenza, which
provides high-quality training and specialized courses
for peacekeepers on the prevention and investigation of
sexual and gender-based violence. This is a project we
are carrying out with the United States of America.

Sexual violence has emerged as a constant of the
new cycle based on conflict, trafficking in persons and
migration. Migrants, especially women and girls, are
highly vulnerable to trafficking for the purposes of
sexual and labour exploitation. In our efforts to manage
the unprecedented migration flows in the Mediterranean,
Italy recently adopted a new law on protecting foreign
unaccompanied minors that provides minors with
specific assistance, including legal assistance, cultural
mediation services and identification, and promotes
family reunification.

Finally, as I said earlier, prevention and assistance
to victims are not enough without accountability for
perpetrators. It is only when sexual violence becomes
visibly more costly that will there be a significant step
forward towards the eradication of this scourge.

