Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): We thank you, Sir, for organizing today's
debate on such an important issue. We also thank the
Secretary-General for introducing his first report
(S/2009/362) pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008), and
welcome the relevant analyses and recommendations it
contains.

Sexual violence is among the most heinous
crimes committed in armed conflict and has become a
veritable weapon of war, in which women and girls pay
a very heavy price. Several initiatives have been
undertaken to put a halt to this phenomenon, including
the adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), whereby the Security Council took an
important step in its efforts to combat sexual violence
in armed conflict. Unfortunately, it must be noted that
such acts continue, in flagrant violation of the
fundamental principles of human rights, international
humanitarian law and relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

Sexual violence is committed deliberately, in
various ways and to different ends by all categories of
parties to conflicts, including members of armed forces
and State police, despite the fact that the latter's
primary duty is to protect the civilian population. In
addition to its direct physical and psychological impact
on victims and their families, such violence goes hand
in hand with insecurity and with restrictions on the
enjoyment of human rights and victims' full
participation in conflict settlement and reconstruction.
Unfortunately, social and cultural factors remain
obstacles to assessing the extent and gravity of the
phenomenon and its consequences, and they must be
addressed.

The responsibility for eradicating this scourge
and protecting its victims belongs primarily to States
and all the parties to a conflict. From preventive
measures to punishment to the ratification of relevant
international instruments, every means are available to
States to act effectively. It is important in particular to
create a sustainable security environment and to
establish independent and accessible justice systems
capable of repairing the damage and combating
impunity. Medical, psychological and economic care is
also essential to victims.

Unfortunately, and in spite of everything, no form
of reparation or treatment, howsoever effective, can
permanently erase the scars borne by victims and their
loved ones. It is therefore necessary to focus our efforts
on prevention, strengthening the rule of law, respect for
human rights, good governance and, where appropriate,
reform of the security and justice sectors.

My delegation welcomes United Nations
activities on this issue, in particular the Secretary-
General's global awareness-raising campaign. The
gravity of the situation requires a comprehensive and
sustainable response through a common strategy. The
United Nations should continue to build its capacity for
action and coordination in order to better assist actors
in the field, with the involvement at all levels of all
members of the United Nations family. The
appointment of a senior official on this issue would
help the process, and we also take note of other
initiatives of the Secretary-General to strengthen the
contribution of the United Nations system.

With respect to peacekeeping operations, it is
essential to design and implement an appropriate
training programme on international humanitarian law,
human rights, international criminal law and relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Moreover, the
effectiveness of a policy of zero tolerance, the
integration of women into the staff of peacekeeping
operations, and the identification of measures to
prevent sexual violence in resolutions establishing or
renewing peacekeeping mandates should remain among
our priorities. These are the challenges that Member
States, troop-contributing countries and the Security
Council should take up.

Sexual violence is a pernicious evil that has a
deep impact on the enduring restoration of stability and
peace. It is therefore essential that peace agreements
take sexual violence into account, in particular in the
course of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and security sector reform. We welcome the
concerted activities of the United Nations to integrate
concerns about sexual violence into mediation processes
and to increase the number of women mediators, who
undoubtedly add value to peace and ceasefire agreements.
For all these reasons, my delegation welcomes
the convening in June, under the auspices of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, of a
colloquium on the theme "Conflict Related Sexual
Violence in Peace Negotiations: Implementing Security
Council Resolution 1820 (2008)". Its conclusions
represent important options for consideration.
The Security Council has an important role to
play in this collective effort, as it demonstrated yet
again this week with its adoption of resolution 1882
(2009), extending the criteria for triggering the
reporting and monitoring mechanism to include sexual
violence against children. Moreover, the Council
should establish a participatory process for collecting
information in order to better gauge the scale and
consequences of the phenomenon.

The challenges to be faced before the scourge of
sexual violence in conflict zones can be definitively
eradicated are still numerous. Mobilization for the full
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) must
therefore remain strong at all levels.

