Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): My delegation
wishes to congratulate the President on Rwanda's
presidency of the Security Council this month and on
convening the present open debate on sexual violence
in conflict. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on sexual violence in conflict
(S/2013/149). I also take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her very useful briefing.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
international community has followed closely the role
of women in the context of war or post-war situations,
not only as victims but, more important, as agents and
important contributors to the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peacebuilding, while stressing the
need to increase their role in decision-making with
regard to conflict prevention and resolution.

My delegation commends those efforts and is
convinced that there is ample room for the greater
involvement of women, especially in the prevention
of war, in the reconciliation, rehabilitation and
reconstruction of societies in post-war situations, and
in avoiding relapses into armed conflict. Women can
and should play greater roles as allies of peace.

In that context, the continued episodes of sexual
violence, as the report describes, including, inter
alia, rape, forced sterilization, abduction for sexual
purposes and sexual slavery, to name just a few of the
egregious acts of violence against women, are even
more frustrating and saddening. As is recognized,
women and girls are those predominantly affected
by sexual violence, although men and boys are also
victims of such heinous acts. The underlying reasons
are varied; in some cases, it is done as a strategy to
displace populations in order to gain access to natural
resources or to facilitate drug trafficking, while in
other cases it becomes a way to vent hatred for a certain
race or ethnicity, or as political or economic retaliation.
In that regard, it is disappointing that the report fails
to highlight the targeted attacks against victims based
on their religious beliefs, despite the persistence of
such acts in nearly every region of the world. Also,
the perpetrators, too, are varied and can be found in
both legitimate State actors, such as those in a position
of trust - members of armed or security forces, for
example, or even United Nations peacekeepers - and
in non-State actors.

The violent domination of a human being
constitutes an egregious form of degradation of his
or her dignity, but also of the aggressor, who, in so
doing, disfigures himself or herself as a human person.
Such heinous crimes are yet another consequence
of the destructive power of war. All States and the
international community as a whole must therefore do
their utmost to stop those barbarous acts, which have
been properly labelled an outrage to the conscience of
humankind.

My delegation wishes to focus its remarks on the
following three aspects, namely, prevention, criminal
responsibility and assistance to victims.

With regard to prevention, it seems not unfitting to
recall how one of the first forms of prevention used in
connection with crimes of sexual violence was our own
intense and timely intervention in crises using various
peaceful means for which the international community
is well equipped, such as mediation, international
measures and a commitment to tackling the underlying
social and economic causes of conflicts. Alongside
those broader protection efforts there should be specific
prevention measures, for example, educating members
of armed forces in the areas of discipline and moral
fibre and undertaking awareness campaigns to promote
values that offer a proper view of women in society.

Secondly, with respect to the notion of criminal
responsibility, the report is at pains to address the
duty to prosecute those culpable for the commission of
crimes of sexual violence. In that regard, my delegation
expresses the importance of adopting and implementing
action plans and legislation aimed at protecting victims
from violence and holding perpetrators accountable.
In cases where the Security Council is called upon
to intervene, appropriate measures should be taken
to reaffirm the outright interdiction of those crimes
and the criminal liability of those responsible for
their commission. It is imperative that the work of
monitoring and prosecuting crimes of sexual violence
be characterized by justice and equity and not political
interests, which could undermine noble motivations
and efforts to combat such crimes.

The third issue - assisting victims - seems to
receive less emphasis in the report. Indeed, in order to
ensure that reprisals or retribution undertaken in the
pursuit ofjustice do not become an end in themselves, it
is necessary to keep the focus on reparation for victims.
It is essential that victims be afforded every assistance,
whereas, on the contrary, all too frequently victims of
sexual assault become ostracized by their communities,
especially those who report sexual violence or those who
have become pregnant as a result of rape. Particularly
disturbing in that context is the revictimization of a

woman or girl who has been raped when she is forced
to live with her aggressor as a so-called wife.

Obviously, sexual violence leads to devastating
physical and psychological consequences, sometimes
even fatal ones. Of concern to my delegation in that
regard is the euphemistic reference in the report to
"access to services that would allow [girls or women]
to safely terminate a pregnancy" (S/2013/149, para. 12).
In that sentence, concealed behind a veil of words, lies
the stark reality of the suppression of human life - the
death of an innocent unborn child - which only visits
further violence upon a woman already in difficulty.
Rather, the woman with child should be offered care,
support, education, counselling and assistance to meet
her material, social and spiritual needs during and after
her pregnancy, including, if necessary, the possibility
of finding a family to adopt her child.

In the final analysis, peace is more about people
than it is about particular structures. People who foster
peace first of all in their own hearts give rise in turn to
innumerable gestures of peace and advance respect for
the right to life and security of all persons, especially
women and children.

