Lieutenant General Gaye: It is an honour to
stand before the Council and to share my experience in
addressing conflict-related sexual violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

On 4 April 2005, I took up my functions as Force
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), and on 8 April I travelled to Walungu in
South Kivu on an initial visit to the company deployed
there. During the Commander's briefing, I was
informed of raids by the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda on villages where women were
kidnapped, turned into sex slaves and released only
when they became pregnant. That was later confirmed
to me in a letter from the Ninja group chief, which I
have kept religiously. It was in this way that, within a
few days of stepping onto Congolese soil, I was made
aware of the gravity and magnitude of the sexual
violence that was prevalent in that country.

It is with that in mind that I wish to pay tribute to
Ms. Wallstrom and to you, Madame President, for your
contributions to the fight against sexual violence and
for the protection of civilians. As a former Force
Commander in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I would like to emphasize that commitment to
preventing sexual violence is a key part of the broader
effort to protect civilians. It was therefore an integral
and specific component of the Mission's
implementation strategy for the protection of civilians
and in support of the national authorities, with a view
to ensuring the sustainability of efforts to build local
ownership in addressing protection priorities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

MONUC worked diligently in coordination with
protection partners to develop a Mission strategy to
address protection issues in a coherent and holistic
conceptual framework. Furthermore, we issued a
practical set of specific guidelines on sexual and
gender-based violence for tactical-level military and
field-level troops to improve preventive and responsive
actions by offering a checklist of activities to be
undertaken by military components in response to
sexual violence against civilians.

From my experience in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, addressing sexual violence requires the
following: first of all, clear commitment from the
leadership all the way from the top down; translating
that commitment into operational orders and directives
for the Mission; awareness of what constitutes a
security threat, taking into account the perspectives of
the local community, including women's organizations,
with adequate flexibility and capacity to adapt military
operations, including deployment tactics, patterns and
frequency of patrols, information analysis, and
response and adaptation to protection needs;
strengthening civilian-military relationships, including
specific outreach to community women so they can
give information about patterns of attack and so that
peacekeepers can also build confidence; improving
understanding of local, political, social and protection
dynamics; enhancing the capacity to address
emergency situations; and acting as a catalyst to build
confidence at all levels within the local community.

Secondly, the strategy elaborated by the
leadership must be implemented on the ground. As a
Force Commander and a member of the senior
management of the integrated peacekeeping mission, I
ensured that my force directives, concept of operations,
rules of engagement - approved by the Under-
Secretary-General - and standard operating
procedures reflected the task of protecting civilians,
including women and children, from sexual violence.

Our military leaders, from my Deputy Force
Commander to battalion and company commanders,
understood this mandated responsibility, which they
translated into practical operations aimed at protecting
civilians from physical violence and facilitating the
establishment of a protective environment. Some of
those operations and key considerations included
identifying high-risk areas and vulnerabilities;
improving military liaison with local populations
through community liaison interpreters; taking

mitigation measures and employing crisis response;
and coordinating with humanitarian partners, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations.

Lastly, strategies to counter sexual violence
should take account of lessons learned to identify
weaknesses within the system and to assess the
efficiency of the mechanisms in place in order to make
necessary adjustments.

In view of this, experience and lessons learned
reaffirm that responding to sexual violence inflicted on
women and children by armed elements in our areas of
operation is an integral part of peacekeepers'
responsibility to deliver better protection of civilians.
In this connection, and as Mr. Le Roy stated, the
Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Field
Support have developed a number of guidelines,
including the operational concept, the strategic
framework for drafting protection of Civilian strategies
in peacekeeping operations, and the inventory of
peacekeeping practices, intended to address conflict-
related sexual violence.

In my current capacity as Military Adviser in
Peacekeeping Operations, I will endeavour to ensure
that military planning processes integrate protection
priorities and that our force generation efforts respond
to the skill set and capabilities required to carry out
protection of civilians tasks. In addition, I am
considering issuing specific guidelines for heads of
military components on the protection of civilians,
including against sexual violence, as a priority in the
Office of Military Affairs. Last but not least, I will also
continue to engage Member States to deploy female
military personnel, as Mr. Le Roy urged.

The success and sustainability of our efforts to
prevent sexual violence in conflict situations require
the engagement of all partners and an integrated
approach to promoting women's rights and security.

