Ms. Rodham Clinton (United States of America): Mr. President, I want to thank you and the
Government of Uganda in its role as Council President
for convening this important meeting on the occasion
of the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).

This meeting gives Member States and
non-governmental organizations an invaluable
opportunity to reflect on what we have achieved over
the past decade, but more importantly, to look very
honestly at what remains to be done to fulfil the
promise we made to women a decade ago. We
promised that women would be treated as agents of
peace and reconciliation, not just as victims of war and
violence.
I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban for
his leadership. He has defined a vision for women's
empowerment and protection that is guiding the
Organization, and he is helping to build the institutions
that can advance our collective mission.
We are very fortunate to have with us today the
United Nations Under-Secretary-General, Michelle
Bachelet, the first head of UN Women. I am delighted
by her appointment and am very grateful for her
commitment and the excellent presentation that she has
already delivered. 1 also want to recognize Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wallstrom,
who is working very hard and needs the support of all
of us to implement resolution 1888 (2009) on sexual
and gender violence. Those women are both dedicated
advocates for women's rights and participation.

I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy, whose Department of Peacekeeping Operations
has taken groundbreaking steps to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). I thank him for increasing
protection measures for vulnerable women and
children and for integrating gender advisers into all
missions.

Finally, I would like to honour our colleagues in
civil society, many of whom are on the front lines,
literally on the battle lines, in the fight for gender
equality in conflict zones around the world. In
particular, I would like to thank Bineta Diop and Mary
Robinson, co-Chairs of the Civil Society Advisory
Group to the United Nations on Women, Peace and
Security, who have been tireless advocates for peace
and for women's inclusion.

So here we are at the tenth anniversary of United
Nations Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). We
are here to reaffirm the goals set forth in that historic
resolution, but more than that, to put forth specific
actions, as my colleague, the Foreign Minister of
Austria, just did in such a commendable set of
proposals. The only way to achieve our goals, to
reduce the number of conflicts around the world, to
eliminate rape as a weapon of war, to combat the
culture of impunity for sexual violence, to build
sustainable peace, is to draw on the full contributions
of both women and men in every aspect of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Women's participation in those activities is not a
nice thing to do. It is not as though we are doing a
favour for ourselves and them by including women in
the work of peace. It is a necessary global security
imperative. Including women in the work of peace
advances our national security interests and promotes
political stability, economic growth and respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Just as in the
economic sphere we cannot exclude the talents of half
of the population, neither, when it comes to matters of
life and death, can we afford to ignore, marginalize and
dismiss the very direct contributions that women can
and have made.

President Obama's national security strategy
recognizes that countries are more peaceful and
prosperous when women are accorded full and equal
rights and opportunity. When those rights and
opportunities are denied, countries lag behind. That is
also true when it comes to issues of human security,
accountability for sexual violence and the trafficking of
women and girls, and all of the other characteristics of
stable thriving societies that provide maternal and child
health care, education and so much else.

In defence, diplomacy and development, which
we consider to be the three pillars of our foreign
policy, we are putting women front and centre, not
merely as beneficiaries of our efforts, but as agents of
peace, reconciliation, economic growth and stability. In
Afghanistan, for example, our diplomatic efforts have
been rooted in the notion that respect for the rights of
women, as protected in the Afghan Constitution, is an
essential element of democracy and stability. The
United States has backed women's inclusion at all
levels, including in the recently formed High Peace
Council, because we believe the potential for
sustainable peace will be subverted if women are
silenced or marginalized.

Our military has also begun to play an active role.
In Namibia, for example, the United States military
helped train nearly 600 peacekeepers on women's
issues, who were then deployed to Chad. That type of
military-to-military engagement helps ensure that
soldiers understand their obligation to protect women
and girls in conflict areas and receive the training on
how to do that.

From Nepal to Guatemala to Uganda, our
development agency, USAID, is promoting women's
roles in politics, supporting their participation in local
peace committees and helping develop plans to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). In fact, in the
future, every USAID project on conflict prevention or
management will study conflicts' effects on women
and will include them in the planning and
implementation of such projects.

But neither the United States nor Member States
can do this work alone. We need the international

community. We certainly need organizations like the
International Committee of the Red Cross, which trains
women to treat landmine victims in Afghanistan, and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which works with men and boys to promote support for
women's rights, and the United Nations itself, which is
building up new capacities to combat sexual violence.
These and other partners are absolutely essential for
fulfilling the promise of resolution 1325 (2000).

There is no starker reminder of the work still
ahead of us than the horrific mass rapes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo last summer. Those
rapes - and our failure as an international community
to bring that conflict to an end and protect women and
children in the process - stand as a tragic rebuke to
our efforts thus far.

We all must do more, and we must think
creatively. Yes, we may have to challenge some
conventional wisdom about how best to end the
impunity not only of those who commit those horrible
violations of human rights, but also of those who
permit them to do so. While visiting Goma last year, I
pledged $17 million to help prevent and respond to
sexual and gender-based violence. This money is now
flowing to provide medical and legal services for
survivors.

In addition, the United States military's Africa
Command has trained a battalion of Congolese soldiers
to work to prevent sexual violence, help victims and
prosecute perpetrators. We know that that is still not
happening. And we know that, unfortunately, there is
not yet the will either in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo itself, in the United Nations, or in the
international community to help bring about an end to
impunity.

Looking ahead, I am pleased to announce two
important steps the United States is taking to advance
the goals of resolution 1325 (2000). First, the United
States will commit nearly $44 million to a set of
initiatives designed to empower women; the largest
portion of approximately $17 million will support civil
society groups that focus on women in Afghanistan.
The women of Afghanistan are rightly worried that, in
the very legitimate search for peace, their rights will be
sacrificed. I have personally stated and I state here
again in the Security Council that none of us can
permit that to happen. No peace that sacrifices
women's rights is a peace we can afford to support.

Some $14 million will also go to
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working to
make clean water more available in conflict zones
because in these areas, when women and girls go
looking for water, they are at higher risk of being
attacked. Similarly, I had the honour of announcing the
Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves last month -
another initiative that, with our support, can protect
women, who will not have to go out seeking firewood
or other forms of fuel if we can revolutionize the way
they are able to cook food for their families.

Another $1.7 million will help fund United
Nations activities, including Special Representative
Wahlstrom's office, and $11 million will help to
expand literacy, job training and maternal health
services for refugee women and girls.

In addition to this new funding, our second step
will be to develop our own national action plan to
accelerate the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) across our Government and with our partners in
civil society. To measure progress on our plan, we will
adopt the indicators laid out in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2010/173). We will measure whether women
are effectively represented in the full range of
peacebuilding and reconstruction efforts, whether they
are protected against sexual violence and whether they
are the focus of conflict prevention, relief and
reconciliation efforts.

Measuring our progress will help us to be held
accountable and to identify those areas where we need
to do more. The national action plan and the new
funding I have announced are two important steps and
we will pursue them with total commitment, but as
several have already said, action plans and funding are
only steps towards a larger goal.

The draft presidential statement that we hope will
be adopted calls for another stocktaking in five years,
but we had better have more to report and we had
better have accomplished more between now and then.
If we have not, there will be those who will lose faith
in our international capacity to respond to such an
overwhelming need because, ultimately, we measure
our progress by the improvement in the daily lives of
people around the world. That must be our cause, and
empowering women to contribute all their talents to
this cause is our calling.

I thank the Member States, NGOs and others
represented here for joining us in this mission.
