Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for including this issue on the
Council's agenda.

Crimes of sexual violence are among the most
widespread and egregious of all violent acts committed
during armed conflict. We note with regret and disgust
that sexual violence is often perpetrated by parties to a
conflict. Put simply, the deliberate and widespread use
of sexual violence is a crime against humanity and, if
used as a method of warfare, a war crime. Australia
condemns this egregious behaviour and demands that
the impunity of perpetrators of these despicable acts
stop. The international community must hold rapists to
account. We have the tools, including the International
Criminal Court, at our disposal, and we must mobilize
them urgently.

As we are all too aware, crimes of sexual
violence are also, in some circumstances, perpetrated
by United Nations personnel. Any act of sexual
violence or exploitation by United Nations personnel
undermines the credibility of the United Nations in
times of crisis. More than that, it is a gross breach of
trust. The role of United Nations peacekeepers in the
protection of civilians from all violence, including
sexual violence, is an important one. There is a strong
need to develop clear guidelines to ensure effective
implementation of that task.

The role of police in peacekeeping operations is
also of fundamental importance. Australia provides its
police with training and guidance on sexual violence
and also provides predeployment training to police
forces from regional countries for missions such as the
Regional Assistance Mission in the Solomon Islands.
We also recognize the important role of women in
peacekeeping missions, whether they be military,
police or civilian personnel. Almost 20 per cent of
Australian police and military personnel currently
involved in peacekeeping missions are women. Not
only are women deployed by Australia; they often hold
senior roles within these missions.

Australia reiterates calls by the international
community for effective training and strong command
structures within military and police contingents, be
they Blue Berets or not, to prevent such crimes and, in
situations where they have occurred, to prosecute them.
The absence of an effective system to prosecute United
Nations personnel who, while a member of a
peacekeeping mission, perpetrate sexual crimes should
not lead to impunity. Where this is the case, the State
of nationality should take action to hold its own
nationals to account.

Community education, including by
non-governmental organizations, is also important,
especially for those who come into contact with
victims of sexual violence. Removing the stigma all
too often attached to survivors of sexual violence and
condemning this violence are also important elements
of such education. It is also essential that victims of
sexual violence have effective and equal access to
justice, and that national systems, including
appropriate national legislation, be in place to ensure
effective judicial outcomes.

This is an important issue which requires the full
attention of the international community. We urge the
United Nations system and Member States to lead by
example and to redouble their efforts to respond to the
crime of sexual violence in armed conflict. As a first
step, Australia calls on Member States to undertake
more extensive predeployment training for all
personnel, including those bound for United Nations
missions. We cannot stand by and allow these
violations to continue.

