Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): 1, too, would like to thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting. I also thank
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative and
Ms. Misaka for their statements and the information
they have presented to us on issues of sexual violence
in armed conflict.

For almost six years, the Security Council has
constantly paid close attention to issues of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict. Any armed
conflict is characterized by a high level of violence in
various forms. Sexual violence is one such phenomenon,
an abhorrent act that calls for resolute condemnation
and severe punishment. This crime is a consequence of
the prevailing impunity and, as correctly pointed out in
the report (S/2014/181) of Secretary-General, is closely
related problems in ensuring security.
The work carried out to prevent and eradicate
violence must be comprehensive and, above all,
aimed at eradicating its sources by settling conflicts
and restoring order and security. Combating just the
manifestations of sexual Violence is unlikely to bring
about the desired results.

The prevention of sexual violence in armed conflict
and punishing perpetrators should be considered in the
context of the whole series of problems associated with
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.
That is the balanced approach laid out in resolution
1325 (2000), and it is on that basis that the work to
elimiate sexual violence should be based.

An important prerequisite for overcoming
violence against women is the full participation of
women themselves in peace talks and post-conflict
reconstruction. The Council should consider the issue of
women and peace and security in the context of armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. The focus of the
Council's attention should be on the most urgent and
large-scale armed conflicts and situations of massive
and systematic rape and violence. Individual cases of
sexual violence, which are criminal acts and not war
crimes, should not become the subject of consideration
by the Security Council.

We must also avoid duplication of effort in this
area by other United Nations entities with relevant
competence - for example, the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council, the Commission on the Status
of Women and UN-Women.

We call on the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict to
act in accordance with her mandate when carrying out
her activities and to give priority attention to situations
on the agenda of the Security Council, where sexual
violence is one of the main issues in the context of the
protection of civilians.

Sexual violence in armed conflict is the topic
we are considering today. We should avoid broader
interpretations of what has been agreed at the
intergovernmental level and enshrined in Security
Council resolutions - a scope that pertains to armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. We believe that
the expansive interpretation of the terminology being
used, and this issue as a whole, can have a negative
influence on the functioning of the Security Council
and the United Nations in this area, as well as on the
effectiveness of the fight against sexual violence.

Furthermore, we must not forget that in the course
of armed conflict, women and children are not subject
only to sexual Violence; they continue to be victims of
killing and maiming, including as a result of terrorist
acts, and the indiscriminate or disproportionate use of
force. Such crimes in particular often go unpunished or
are justified by the inevitability of so-called collateral
damage.

Combating sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict is impossible without the active involvement
of national authorities in the process. The report of the
Secretary-General therefore places particular emphasis
on the need for national ownership and the leading
role and responsibility of States. Measures taken by
the United Nations system and civil society should
complement the efforts of States.

