Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you on your country's
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council
this month and to thank you, Sir, for convening this
debate of highest importance on women and pace
and security. I also thank you for affording us the
opportunity to meet today, not only to celebrate the
fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) but
also to take stock of the progress made to date, as well
as to define the gaps and challenges that remain to be
addressed and to renew our commitments.

The historic adoption 15 years ago of resolution
1325 (2000) recognized the role that women play in
matters of peace and security, not only as victims but
also as agents of change and indispensable actors in
the re-establishment, maintenance and consolidation of
peace. That resolution enabled us to make significant
progress towards women's autonomy, particularly
in conflict situations, by developing national action
plans with quantifiable indicators and through the
implementation of follow-up mechanisms. Since
the adoption of that resolution, a number of new
commitments were undertaken, aimed at according
greater political recognition and stronger emphasis to
the question of women and peace and security in political
discourse. Six other Security Council resolutions have
contributed to developing that political framework and
to promoting positive norms. The adoption of all those
resolutions sends a strong message with respect to the
firm and continuing commitment of the international
community to advancing women's independence and to
protecting their rights.

Despite some signs of progress, the impact on
women's lives and on their role in the world has been
sporadic. Conflicts have devastating consequences for
everyone, but women and girls are often the target of
gender-based violence and are those most excluded
from the political processes that are essential to
guaranteeing peace and security. Because women are
the most vulnerable and the most frequently targeted
members of populations in situations of conflict, they
have an undeniable and unique contribution to make
to peace negotiations. Members of the Council will
note that the experience of both Haiti and West Africa
has proven that, when women are involved in peace
processes, they have been able to bring their sensitivity
and creativity not only to the peace process itself but
also to national reconciliation efforts and the process of
socioeconomic reintegration.

Conflict prevention is an essential element of the
women and peace and security programme. Women's
perspectives on the tensions in social relationships,
their awareness of threats to personal, social and
community safety, their knowledge of the flow of small
arms and light weapons in the heart of communities,
and their interpretation of extremism in local discourse
help shape the primary mechanism for rapid response
and early warning when conflict is imminent; yet they
are rarely heeded or taken into account by the local
authorities tasked with security.
Conflict prevention is a central pillar of the
programme for women and peace and security. Since
2000, however, prevention has unfortunately failed to
receive the same degree of sustained attention as post-
conflict problems such as the reconstruction of State
security services.

Resolution 2122 (2013) recognizes that lack of
attention and aims to promote the role of women at all
levels in conflict prevention, resolution and recovery.
The resolution has filled a gap in interpretation,
which was formerly focused only on the prevention
of gender-based violence during conflicts rather than
on preventing conflicts themselves. It is therefore
necessary to follow a more comprehensive and holistic
approach that tackles the root causes of conflicts, and
not just their impact on women, girls, men and boys.

The establishment of genuine peace in society
requires healthy and inclusive political, economic and
social structures. Local women's organizations are
drivers in promoting women's empowerment and their
effective participation in political, economic and social
life. My delegation endorses the recommendations
set out in the Secretary-General's later report
(S/2015/716), in particular those that encourage equal
and timely access to basic services, putting an end to
discriminatory laws and practices, strengthening the
rule of law, ensuring equitable economic development
and maintaining a space for civil society.

Women and girl refugees and internally displaced
persons continue to be victims of violations of all
sorts. Regional dialogues with refugee women, which
are regularly organized by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, show that
undocumented women and girls continue to suffer
from the worst acts of gender-based discrimination, in
particular in terms of access to health-care services,
education and other social services. Women and girl
refugees and internally displaced persons who are
fleeing violence and fighting find themselves once
again at risk of sexual exploitation, rape, prostitution
and forced marriage, pregnancy and sterilization. Even
worse, they are now auctioned and sold in slave markets.

Member States must comply with their international
obligations and register the refugees who are present
on their territory. That will ensure the empowerment
of vulnerable women and their active participation
in national and regional institutions for conflict
prevention. In addition, it is important to allow broad
participation by all internally displaced and refugee
women in decision-making processes in order to not
leave them simply in the hands ofpolitical organizations
or criminal groups.

By way of conclusion, allow highlight the following
observations.

Strong political will and the full commitment of
Member States to the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) will enable the active participation of women
in national, regional and international institutions for
the prevention, protection and management of conflict
situations.

The participation of women in peace efforts is a
matter of gender equality and respect for universal
human rights. It is crucial to achieving lasting peace,
economic recovery, social cohesion and political
credibility. Women should be encouraged to become
further involved in issues of peace. Their contribution
is necessary to establish lasting peace. They must be
involved at every stage of the efforts undertaken to
restore the rule of law and rebuild societies through
transitional justice. Their voice must be heard and their
rights protected. We must eliminate stereotypes in order
to guarantee the effective participation of women at all
stages of the peace and decision-making processes.

Enhancing the empowerment of women allows
them to meet their basic needs and reduce their working
hours, and thus to have more time and space to become
involved in the process of managing local conflicts.
That will also contribute to strengthening social
stability.

