Mr. Fernandez de Soto Valderrama (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you, Sir, in
your capacity as President of the Security Council, for
convening today's open debate on women and peace
and security. It is a special privilege for me that my first
statement as Permanent Representative of my country
is on that topic, on which Colombia has so many lessons
learned to share with the international community.
I would also like to express my appreciation for the
briefings and contributions of Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, and civil-
society representative Randa Siniora Atallah.

We appreciate the reference to Colombia and
its peace process in the concept note for this open
debate (S/2018/904, annex) as a positive example of
the implementation of the contents of resolution 1325
(2000), although, as you rightly said, Mr. President, we
still have many challenges ahead of us.
We know that women's participation and political
and economic empowerment, and the promotion of
their leadership, are essential to achieving the goal ofa
peaceful and inclusive society based on the principles
of legality, entrepreneurship and equality. That is why I
would like to highlight two milestones that have marked
the two months since the Government of President
Ivan Duque Marquez took power. For the first time
in its history, Colombia has a woman in the position
of Vice-President of the Republic, who, in addition to
her own duties, has been tasked with supporting the
President in promoting gender parity. The President
has also formed the first gender-balanced Cabinet in
the history of Colombia, since eight of the 16 ministries
are led by women. It is crucial to promote women's
political and economic empowerment by example and
through concrete actions. It is the only way we can help
to eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination
against women.

In Colombia's view, with regard to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, gender parity and
women's empowerment must continue to be critical
issues on the international agenda. International
commitments in that area should reflect the recognition
and guarantee of women's rights. We must ensure that
they are integrated into foreign policy and all sectors
at the State level. In that regard, and with the aim of
promoting women's participation and empowerment
in delivering sustainable development throughout our
country, our forthcoming new national development
plan will include a section on gender parity in public
policy, a plan to guarantee a life free of violence, the
prevention of adolescent pregnancy, the establishment
of a gender equality centre and care for victims
of conflict.

Colombia's experience with regard to the topic
of this open debate is known to the entire Security
Council. It is important for us to continue to prioritize
the promotion of women's participation in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in peacebuilding.
During the peace process we signed nearly two years
ago, there were women among the peace negotiators at
the negotiating table and a gender subcommittee was
formed to ensure the inclusion of a gender-sensitive
approach in the peace agreement. That achievement
was acknowledged by the Secretary-General when he
affirmed that Colombia's peace agreement contained
more than 100 gender-specific provisions. This week,
President Duque announced that we had to make rapid
progress in achieving the highest rate of women's
participation in our armed forces' leadership, for which
Colombia has made major reforms that we will continue
to strengthen. We share the concerns expressed by civil
society about situations in Colombia in which women
social leaders and human rights defenders have been
threatened or killed. We will continue to redouble
our efforts to strengthen the existing institutional
framework and to accelerate investigations and
protection measures against that scourge. Our lessons
learned on the role of women in achieving and building
peace can be applied in other contexts and regions.
Women and girls play a fundamental role in my
country. We believe firmly in their role in the building
of democratic and inclusive societies.

