Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this important meeting to discuss the topic of
peacebuilding and the significance of female
participation in this process. We are confident that our
deliberations today will constructively contribute to
this important item on the Security Council's agenda.
We would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-
moon and the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Peter Wittig, for their
detailed briefings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that the process
of peacebuilding must be supported by a variety of
national and international actors at different levels,
including political, technical, operational, national and
regional. It is very important that, in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, the roles and responsibilities of
different actors within the United Nations system be
clearly defined.

Peacebuilding, as a primarily national challenge
and responsibility, is largely shaped and sequenced by
national factors. In that respect, an early focus on
national capacity development is a central theme of the
United Nations system's engagement in peacebuilding.
The development of national capacity and ownership
are among the key priorities in this process.

We are aware of the fact that peacebuilding
priorities may vary in response and can include
inclusive political processes, the provision of basic
services, restoring core Government functions, or
providing basic security or economic revitalization
measures. Those activities are aimed at making peace
self-sustaining.

If we are to be able to provide security and
deliver services to the population in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, priority must be given to the
restoration of State authority and the capacity-building
of national institutions. Only a viable State with a
strong structure will contribute to peace and stability
and reduce the risk of relapse into conflict.

Stronger partnerships with Member States,
regional and subregional organizations, international
financial institutions, civil society and other actors are
preconditions for delivering greater impact and results
on the ground. In order to implement certain
peacebuilding tasks, it is crucial to strengthen
connections and linkages within the United Nations
family. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to provide
early and predictable support in priority areas of
peacebuilding.

In that regard, the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, with its integrated and coherent
approach, should be emphasized. As a unique
intergovernmental advisory body, its function of
addressing the needs of countries emerging from
conflict towards sustainable peace is of vital
importance. The need to link security and development,
recognized in the mechanism of the Peacebuilding
Commission, should be linked to utilizing its potential
to play the preventive role defined in its mandate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the view that
mainstreaming women's participation in peacebuilding,
addressing their post-conflict needs, increasing their
engagement in post-conflict planning and governance,
and enhancing their capacity to contribute to economic
recovery and overall social stability are key issues in
post-conflict societies. We therefore consider that
increasing women's confidence in the political process
not only requires action in the immediate post-conflict
period, but also influences the design of provisions on
power-sharing or justice. It is of vital importance to
enhance the funding that addresses the specific needs
of women and girls, the economic empowerment of
women and gender equality.

The gender perspective needs to be filtered
through country-specific situations. It should also be an
integral part of every aspect of peacebuilding on the
ground. To that end, the role of women in
peacebuilding needs to move from a niche concern to
the mainstream. Enhancing women's capacity to
engage in peacebuilding needs to include, inter alia,
supporting peace processes through independent
diplomatic initiatives, providing bilateral assistance to
post-conflict countries and participating within United
Nations intergovernmental bodies. We would like to
underline the importance of enhancing the mobilization
of resources for initiatives that address women's
specific peacebuilding needs, advance their equality
and empower them. We urge Member States and other
partners to render their support.

We welcome the fact that there is overwhelming
support in the international community for vigorous
action to ensure women's full participation in
peacebuilding, and we urge Member States to make
substantial long-term investments in women's security
and productive potential. We also welcome the
establishment of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women and
encourage its close work and cooperation with relevant
United Nations agencies and other stakeholders in that
direction.

Much has been achieved in the area of
peacebuilding, but there is still much work ahead of us.
Nevertheless, we cannot lose the momentum towards
starting to revise procedures and design programmes,
with careful deliberations on actions to be taken
without delay. It is important to point out that long-
term investment provides the potential for economic
recovery, a more stable society and lasting peace.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our readiness
to share our knowledge, experience and lessons learned
on post-conflict peacebuilding in every situation where
our first-hand experience may be seen as relevant,
reliable and useful.

