Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia welcomes the
Secretary-General's report on women and peace and
security. We appreciate this debate and also the
2

briefings that were given this morning. The report has
particular poignancy, given the adoption earlier this
year of resolution 1820 (2008), which recognized the
security dimension of sexual violence when such
violence is used as a tactic of war. I reaffirm our strong
support for resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

The Secretary-General's report (S/2008/622)
makes for sobering reading. That millions of women
and children continue to account for the majority of
casualties in hostilities, that the targeted use of sexual
violence is increasingly used as a potent weapon of war
and acts as a destabilizing factor in conflict and post-
conflict societies, and that impunity remains for
perpetrators of sexual and gender-based violence are
facts of which we, as the global community, should be
ashamed.

The report does, however, provide some
encouragement. Following the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) in 2000, a culture of gender equality and
women's empowerment in peace and security areas is
slowly taking hold. Australia welcomes the leadership
role that the United Nations and other entities have
taken in strengthening internal strategies and
guidelines.

We particularly acknowledge the work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs (DPA) in that area.
Australia fully supports their efforts, and we recently
committed additional support to assist with the DPA's
engagement with African regional organizations on
conflict prevention.

Australia is also working in the Pacific region
with the Pacific Islands Forum secretariat and the
United Nations Development Programme Pacific
Centre to strengthen the work of regional organizations
on crisis prevention and recovery, conflict analysis,
strengthening regional security, mainstreaming gender
considerations and implementing violence-reduction
policies and interventions. Australia also values and
supports efforts by regional organizations such as
femLINKpacific.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the
ongoing and egregious incidences of sexual and
gender-based violence. Australia welcomes the
measures that some Member States have taken to
prevent and respond to such violence. Gender training
for security forces and judicial officials, developing
meaningful measures to protect and rehabilitate
08-57549
survivors, increasing public awareness about sexual
violence and removing its stigma are key elements in
tackling that scourge, but perhaps most crucial is the
need to end impunity for its perpetrators. As a global
community, we cannot continue to allow the
perpetrators of such violence to go unpunished. Neither
can we continue to allow victims to be the subject of
court systems that do not take account of their needs,
nor can we condone situations in which the systematic
intimidation of survivors and reprisals by perpetrators
are condoned. We also strongly support the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy.

As you requested, Mr. President, we have
summarized our distributed statement and direct the
attention of members to additional matters addressed in
it, particularly the mainstreaming of gender
perspectives in all negotiations. One half of the
population simply cannot be excluded from peace
processes and nation-building in post-conflict societies.
We call on the United Nations system, Member States,
regional bodies and civil society to enhance efforts to
mainstream gender perspectives at all levels of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

