The President: I thank Ms. Salah for her briefing,
and I thank the guests present here for their applause.
I had been wondering whether people applaud at the
United Nations, because I am a stranger to this organ.
I am therefore very pleased to see that there is a human
element present. I notice that many participants are
looking at their cell phones as the discussion continues.
I hope that they are tweeting that they support all the
demands that have been put to them this morning.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa.

My name is Naledi Pandor, and I wish to begin by
acknowledging the Security Council for its adoption of
resolution 2493 (2019), just a few moments ago. We are
absolutely thrilled at the unanimity that was indicated
in that adoption. I am told that that is a welcome return
to consensus in the Council, and we are extremely
pleased at that.

I wish to thank everybody here for participating in
our discussion today. In particular, I wish to thank all
those who provided us with such significant briefings
in the course of our deliberations. As we have heard,
women from diverse contexts across the world continue
to face obstacles and resistance. They continue to bear the
brunt of armed conflict, and their personal, economic,
civil and political security is persistently undermined.

Women's efforts to ensure their participation
in peace processes continue not to receive a positive
response. Ifwe fail to address the barriers in the next 20
years and beyond, then we will have to face the fact that
we are falling far short of our ambitions to realize the
objectives that we set as an international community.
Together, the United Nations, Member States, regional
organizations, civil society and other actors supporting
peace processes must hold each other accountable to
maintain and go beyond current progress in the area of
women and peace and security and its agenda by 2020.

Everybody's participation today in this important
meeting confirms the significance of the women and
peace and security agenda. The myriad and complex
conflicts in the world serve to underscore the need to
reinforce the implementation of that agenda and its
related actions. Resolution 1325 (2000), which was
adopted 19 years ago in October, and its subsequent
resolutions underpin the women and peace and security
international normative framework.

We in South Africa View the women and peace and
security agenda as a means for women to mediate in
conflict situations and as an essential tool for ending
the use of force as a means of settling disputes. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800) that we
have before us provides us with a useful overview of
the successes and gaps in the implementation of that
agenda. It gives us concrete recommendations that
can move us from rhetoric to action, so that we can
effectively implement the commitments that we have
set ourselves. Women are tired of us talking. Women
want action. Women want change.

It is within that context that we in South Africa
saw it fit to present a draft resolution (8/2019/841)
focused on the full implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. Resolution 2493 (2019) now
recognizes that, although there has been progress, there
is still a great deal that we must do.

As we exchange views on how to strengthen
implementation, particularly as we move towards the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), it is also imperative for us as the international
community to take into account the findings and the
recommendations of the 2015 Global Study on the
Implementation of United Nations Security Council
resolution 1325 - the study commissioned by this very
organ needs to be taken into account. We believe that
some of those recommendations from 2015 are still
relevant in terms of elaborating practical and attainable
deliverables. It is also for that reason that we in South
Africa have advocated for its inclusion, in order to
embolden the message on the full implementation of the
agenda outlined in resolution 1325 (2000).

Our deliverables must be visible and discernible.
They must be clearly aimed at ensuring the meaningful
participation of women at all levels of peace processes;
increasing the number of women in uniformed and
civilian components of peacekeeping operations;
investing in women as peacebuilders, such as in
mediation and negotiation; protecting the human rights
of women, particularly sexual and reproductive health

rights; and advancing accountability for heinous crimes
such as sexual violence.

South Africa has been a proponent of the women
and peace and security agenda since its inception. We
remain committed to implementing the agenda so that it
can support and contribute to silencing the guns across
the world, as well as work towards saving succeeding
generations from the scourge ofwar, as we committed to
do at the founding of this very Organization. Our country
has been engaged in training women across all of these
areas. We are therefore optimistic that operationalizing
the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediators
Networks will advance some of these objectives. We
are not speaking empty rhetoric when we refer to the
participation of women - we have women here from
our various armed forces in South Africa and our police
service who have served in peacekeeping missions.
They are here to observe our continued commitment
to serving areas of the world in which there is conflict.
I would like to ask those women in uniform to stand.
They have served and therefore deserve recognition. I
know that I am breaching all diplomatic rules, but it is
unfortunate that they appointed a novice as Minister for
Foreign Affairs.

On peacekeeping, South Africa will continue to
ensure the meaningful participation of women in peace
support operations. Currently, our national defence
force comprises 30 per cent women. That has enabled
South Africa, as a troop-contributing country to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, to deploy more females
on the front lines of armed conflicts. The South African
contingent of the Force Intervention Brigade of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is composed of
14.5 per cent women, and the officer commanding the
South African force is a woman. During our side event
here at the United Nations on women in peacekeeping,
which was held yesterday afternoon, these women
shared experiences on how to achieve the goals we have
set to increase the representation of women in peace
support operations. We are pleased that the United
Nations uniformed personnel gender-parity strategy
clearly indicates the quotas and time frames that must
be reached to increase the number of women deployed
as military, police, corrections andjustice personnel. As
a supporter of collective approaches to address issues
that affect us all, South Africa will continue to actively
participate in existing global initiatives, such as the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network; the

Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations; and the
Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
We find these initiatives useful in that they also serve
as instruments to raise awareness on the importance of
the women and peace and security agenda.

As I conclude, let us agree to commit today to
continue to advance the cause of women and of peace
and security and the agenda thereto by ensuring that
we implement the recommendations and guidelines
emanating from existing resolutions. Our contributions
all indicate that we know what must be done - perhaps
we need to devote a sharper focus on why we are failing
to act in pursuit of agreed objectives. Once we have
identified the real barriers, we will probably then begin
to make greater progress.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other Council
members who wish to make statements.

I call on the Minister of State at the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany.

