Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of my country reiterates its categorical
condemnation of sexual exploitation and abuse. Egypt
also reiterates that it is important that Member States
take the necessary measures to combat these crimes
and eliminate them completely. The necessary efforts
to help victims should be made. Egypt and all Member
States are committed to respecting the zero-tolerance
policy with regard to these crimes. I would like to
highlight several items of importance in that regard.

First, the United Nations body responsible for
the examination of issues of conduct and discipline
within peacekeeping operations, including cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse, is the General Assembly,
whether through the Fifth Committee or the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. That is
demonstrated by the fact that the report (A/70/729) of
the Secretary-General presented to the Council today
was initially submitted to the General Assembly,
which is the competent body in this area. The General
Assembly, which represents all the States Members
of the United Nations, including troop-contributing
countries, is undoubtedly the body that is the most apt
to examine cases of sexual exploitation and abuse from
a broader angle that takes into consideration the various
primary actors.

Secondly, any investigation of cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse within peacekeeping operations
must include the examination of all the different missions
mandated by the Security Council. Moreover, such
investigation should treat all United Nations personnel
in the same manner without any discrimination
whatsoever, because fair and equal treatment within the
context of cases of sexual exploitation and abuse sends
a strong message to all those who would be tempted to
commit such a crime, and ensures that the victims will
not refrain from reporting perpetrators because of their
nationality, affiliation or the organizations to which
they are connected.

Thirdly, Egypt believes that cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse should not be used as a tool to
attack troop-contributing countries or their reputation,
or to undermine the significant sacrifice they are
undertaking to re-establish peace and security for
civilians. Cases of sexual exploitation are individual,
isolated cases. They represent a handful of incidents
in comparison to the over 100,000 troops deployed.
Moreover, these cases are not representative of the
conduct of troop-contributing countries. My delegation
is therefore categorically opposed to a policy of
collective punishment against forces that are making
the ultimate sacrifice in order to implement a mandate
under very difficult conditions.

Fourthly, the best way to combat these crimes is to
have Member States conduct investigations straightway
into allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Moreover, the Secretary-General must be informed of
the results of such investigations as soon as possible.

Furthermore, it is essential to ensure that United
Nations camps are separated from civilian populations.
Also, contingents should be rotated and provided with
adequate living conditions.

Of course, we thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment and for having presented his vision
of combating cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
to the Security Council. However, at the same time,
Member States should have been given an opportunity
and sufficient time to discuss this very important topic
within the framework of the General Assembly.

