Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): First of all, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, for their briefings. I would also like to
thank Ms. Rhoda Misaka for her powerful briefing as a
representative of civil society.

Japan welcomes the latest report of the Secretary-
General on this agenda item (S/2014/181). Newly
introduced national-level policy recommendations
will help the Security Council to continuously monitor
country-specific situations. Japan also appreciates that
the report highlights the role of United Nations Action
as a coordination mechanism, and its activities on
enhancing prevention.

Security Council resolution 2106 (2013) provided,
for the first time, the theme of sexual violence in
conflict with a comprehensive prevention framework.
We believe that the emphasis on prevention is vital if
we are ever to defeat conflict-related sexual violence.

Progress on the ground is dependent upon concrete
action by both national Governments and civil society
in affected countries. The international community
must support them to achieve change on the ground.

The Japanese Government fully supports the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General's
new priorities of strengthening national ownership,
leadership and responsibility. In appreciation ofthe work
of the Special Representative, the Japanese Government
invited Ms. Bangura to Japan last November. During
her visit, Prime Minister Abe reassured her of Japan's
commitment to cooperating closely with her Office.
We are deepening our collaboration with her Office,
as well as its Team of Experts and United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. Japan
is now the second largest contributor to the Special
Representative's Office, after Sweden.

One example of Japan's assistance is a contribution
of $2 million dollars to support the work of the
Team of Experts in Somalia and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In those countries, the Special
Representative and her Team of Experts, through their
engagement efforts, have succeeded in forging political
commitments with national Governments. Joint
communiques were later signed between the Special
Representative and the respective Governments. Japan's
financial contribution will help those Governments to
implement the communiques.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, we are helping the Government expand and
consolidate the special police for the protection of
women and children. We will also support the activities
of the special representative of President Kabila on
sexual violence once that post is filled.

Furthermore, on International Women's Day,
the Japanese Mission and the Office of the Special
Representative co-hosted a special event here in
New York in order to raise awareness of the topic
we are discussing today. We look forward to further
cooperation with the Special Representative in that
regard, including at the upcoming Global Summit to
End Sexual Violence in Conflict, to be held in London
in June.

