Ms. Simonyan (Armenia): Armenia would like
to express appreciation to the Bolivian presidency of
the Security Council for the choice of the theme for
the present debate. The women and peace and security
agenda provides an important normative framework
for strengthening our collective efforts towards
conflict prevention, recovery, rehabilitation and
sustaining peace.

We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
about the persisting challenges facing the protection
of international human rights and humanitarian law
across conflicts, particularly with regard to the rights
of women and girls, who are still at an increased risk
of violence, injustice and inequality, including in
terms of access to essential services, resilience and
livelihood opportunities. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/900) points out to disturbing prevalence
of gender-based violence in situations of conflict.
Armenia is a strong advocate for the protection of the
rights of women living in conflict areas. A failure to
promote these efforts can threaten peace and security
processes and undermine our collaborative efforts to
protect at-risk populations. The United Nations system
should do more to engage affected populations and
support those who raise their voices.

Armenia welcomes the special focus of the
Secretary-General's report on the central role of women's
meaningful participation and representation to prevent
conflict and sustain peace. We also acknowledge the
important efforts for advancing women's representation
and leadership across the entire United Nations system.

This spring was a momentous time in Armenian
history, during which the citizens of Armenia, with
youth and women at the forefront, fully exercised their
fundamental freedoms of expression, belief and opinion.
The Government of Armenia has since promoted
the sense of confidence in women's meaningful
participation in public affairs and political processes.

Armenia is placing high priority on fundamental
reforms aiming to accelerate gender equality and
women's empowerment outcomes. They include
enhancing women's participation in decision-making
positions and increasing women's representation
in politics. We are currently in the final stage of the
elaboration of the national action plan for resolution
1325 (2000), following an inclusive process of
extensive public consultations involving civil society.
The adoption of the action plan, upon the completion
of the finalization procedure, will mark an important
milestone in translating the objectives of resolution
1325 (2000) into specific commitments and action.

Armenia is fully committed to the promotion
of gender-sensitive policies, having embraced the
women and peace and security agenda as a priority in
our national and foreign policies. This year, Armenia
was elected to the United Nations Commission on
the Status of Women. We take this opportunity to
renew our commitment to global efforts for women's
empowerment and the enhancement of opportunities,
as well as gender equality in all facets of economic,
political and social life.
(spoke in French)

Earlier this month, Armenia hosted the Summit of
la Francophonie in Yerevan. One of the main documents
adopted at the Yerevan Summit was the Francophonie
strategy for the promotion of equality between
women and men, and the rights and empowerment
of women and girls. The strategy recognizes that
women and women's organizations and networks play
an important role in promoting peace, mobilizing
peace movements and preserving communities, in
particular in conflict situations, when their economic
and social responsibilities increase. The strategy also
recognizes that the participation of women from diverse
socioeconomic backgrounds in peace processes creates
the conditions for an inclusive approach conducive to
genuine national reconciliation, which is necessary for
the effective implementation of peace agreements.

In conclusion, Armenia stands ready to support
commitments to increase women's participation in
peace processes and to increase their representation
at all levels of decision-making. We are convinced
that the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals, with their promise of leaving no one behind,
will be possible only through resolute commitment and
concerted efforts to empower women in an inclusive
and equitable way at all levels.

