Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): I would like to express
my appreciation to the Ghanaian presidency of the
Security Council for the holding of this open debate on
women and peace and security.

Croatia has aligned itself with the statement made
by the representative of Portugal on behalf of the
European Union, but I would like to add a few points
on the matter on behalf of my Government.

Various case studies suggest that peace
agreements, post-conflict reconstruction and
governance have a better chance of success when
women are involved, in part because women have an
inclusive approach to security and address key social
and economic issues that might otherwise be ignored.
Let us not forget that, in all countries, women's burden
of work is generally much heavier than that of men,
leaving less time and energy for involvement in
political life. It is therefore vital for the promotion of
gender equality and the empowerment of women to
increase women's participation in politics so that two
tenets of Millennium Development Goal 3 can be
reached.

Croatia strongly believes that women in conflict
situations need special attention by this powerful body
of the United Nations. Both the report of the Secretary-
General on the girl child (A/62/297) and the report of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict (A/62/228) state the same
thing: traditional attitudes towards girls in societies
limit their right to express their views, and girls
seeking asylum, refugee girls and internally displaced
girls are in need of special protection from physical or
mental violence. The Committee on the Rights of the
Child has noted with concern the lack of effective
measures to prevent and prosecute the perpetrators of
violence against women and girls by military
personnel, including by foreign military personnel
stationed on military bases.

Beginning in childhood, women face
discrimination ranging from lower levels of education
to prevailing social attitudes doubting their competence
as decision-makers. Although many rights have been
recognized for children in general, it is interesting to
note that, although 185 countries are parties to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, the Convention is
subject to one of the highest numbers of reservations of
any United Nations treaty. That underscores worldwide
resistance to women's rights.

Ensuring that women have a greater voice in
household and community decisions is critical to
fulfilling their rights, as well as the rights of children.
It is beyond doubt that women would ensure the
systematic inclusion of children's concerns in
peacemaking and post-conflict phases. If women's and
children's rights are not explicitly part of the discourse
at those critical stages, they will not be addressed as
they deserve.

The exclusion of women from peace negotiations
and the drafting of constitutions, as well as from the
effective reform of the security sector, governance and
the rule of law, means that their rights and views, not
only as victims but also as citizens and former
combatants, will not be fully represented in post-
conflict reconstruction stages. Let us not forget that
even among child soldiers up to 40 per cent are girls.

At the end of 2006, women representatives from
the Ministry of Women's Affairs of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan paid a visit to Croatia in the
framework of cooperation between the two countries.
As Afghan women representatives stated, the goal of
their visit was to gather experience from Croatian
women in dealing with war and post-war situations. As
they explained, unemployment and an illiteracy rate of
70 per cent are among the greatest problems of their
society. Those are some of the reasons why men turn to
drug abuse and family violence, which often leads to
the self-immolation of women.

That example shows that in the past decade
women across the world have managed to become
increasingly involved in conflict resolution processes.
There has also been significant progress in the United
Nations system in terms of policy reforms, norm-
setting and institutional development. However, a large
gap between policy and practice still exists, in
particular at the country level.

Croatia is participating in 15 United Nations
peacekeeping operations, with female peacekeepers
comprising 7 per cent of its personnel. In addition, we
are implementing a zero-tolerance policy towards
sexual exploitation and abuse in field operations.

Croatia welcomes the fact that the Council's
attention was seized with the issue of ensuring stronger
accountability mechanisms for the integration of
resolution 1325 (2000) into the country-specific and
related thematic work of the Council. Croatia would
welcome it if the Security Council were to consider
establishing a dedicated monitoring mechanism that
would increase the Council's contribution to
preventing and prosecuting Violence against women in
armed conflicts.

