Mrs. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Spanish presidency for having organized this timely
debate to mark the fifteenth anniversary of and the
global review on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security.

My delegation aligns itself with the declaration
made by the observer ofthe the European Union. I take
this the opportunity to make some observations from
our national perspective.

(spoke in English)

Fifteen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we now have sufficient momentum to
confirm our determination to implement our national
commitments with regard to the women and peace
and security agenda. We would therefore like to thank
Spain and the United Kingdom for preparing resolution
2242 (2015), which was just adopted and which Poland
proudly co-sponsored.

We fully understand that there can be no durable
and sustainable post-conflict recovery without
meaningful reconciliation and without the restoration
of true confidence in justice. In particular, there
can be no peace and security without addressing the
consequences of violence against women, and no long-
term stability and prosperity without providing justice
and ensuring that such crimes are not repeated. Poland
is committed to ending impunity. We will continue to
support the work of the International Criminal Court,
both by sharing our expertise and by contributing
financially to the Court's Trust Fund for Victims.

Poland attaches the utmost importance to the
practical involvement of women in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping. One of the ways to engage them in
decision-making is by strengthening their participation
in the legal system. Accordingly, we support the
candidature of Ms. Agnieszka Klonowiecka-Milart
to a judgeship position on the United Nations Dispute
Tribunal based in Nairobi. With her 17 years of
experience within the United Nations as an international
judge for the United Nations on the Supreme Court of
Kosovo and the Supreme Court Chamber in Cambodia
for the Khmer Rouge trials, as well as an expert in legal
reform in Bosnia, Afghanistan and Kosovo, she will, we
believe, set a good example for other women aspiring to
make a difference in conflict and post-conflict areas.

(spoke in French)

Poland supports the candidature of a woman for the
office of the next Secretary-General. We are convinced
that that would contribute to bolstering the participation
of women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping, as
well as the advancement of women at all levels of
decision-making.

(spoke in English)

From 2011 to 2013, Poland trained professional
experts in the field of gender equality to advise the
commanders of Polish contingents abroad. Since
then, they have supported the Polish commanders
in Afghanistan and Kosovo. Poland will also take
measures to combat the under-representation of women
within national civilian contingents for peacekeeping
operations, with a view to increasing their number and
to ensuring that higher positions as well are filled by
women candidates.
Last but not least, we recognize the indispensable
role of women's participation and empowerment as
a key component of lasting peace and sustainable
development. As the lessons from Sierra Leone,
Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea Bissau have taught
us, sustainable peace and security can be achieved only
through the full participation of all sectors of society, in
which the contribution of women is fundamental.

We would also like to stress that combating sexual
violence against women in armed conflicts remains
an important issue for the Polish Government. We
welcomed the anti-sexual-violence initiative of the
British Government as a timely and necessary initiative
aimed at addressing the culture of impunity. As a
member of the UN-Women Executive Board, Poland
stands ready to cooperate further in that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that Poland has
decided to earmark a minimum of 15 per cent of all our
future funding for the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund to be dedicated to women's specific needs, and
in particular to advancing gender equality in post-
conflict situations. Already this year, in partnership
with UN-Women, we have initiated a project involving
the innovative employment of Ukrainian internally
displaced women with children. That pilot project will
continue to grow in the coming years.

