Mr. Paet (Estonia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Estonia and Latvia. I
thank all the briefers for their statements today and
welcome the adoption of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/21).
Estonia and Latvia align themselves with the
statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

As highlighted in the concept note prepared by the

delegation of Argentina (S/2014/ 731, annex), throughout
the development of the normative framework of the
women and peace and security agenda, namely, in a
number of Security Council resolutions on the subject,
the particular risks faced by women and girl refugees
and internally displaced persons has been addressed.
Despite that, the issue has been more in the background
than the specific focus of earlier Security Council open
debates. Therefore, we would like to thank Argentina
for choosing this relevant theme for today's debate.

The forced displacement of women and girls is not
only a humanitarian issue, but a long-term development
issue, a human rights issue, a peace and security issue
and a key challenge for the women and peace and
security agenda. It is paramount that we tackle the
discrimination, human rights abuses and obstacles to
justice that refugee and internally displaced women and
girls are facing every day.

Throughout this year, women and children,
particularly girls, have been affected by newly
emerging forms of violence and conflicts associated
with the proliferation of militias and armed groups
linked to violent extremism. In Iraq, the terrorist
movement called the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant has conducted the abduction, enslavement,
rape, forced marriage and sale into slavery of several
thousand Yazidi and other minority women and girls.
In Nigeria, another extremist movement, Boko Haram,
abducted schoolgirls and has been holding them captive
for over six months now. The international community
must resolutely oppose such barbarity.

Those are only a few examples. Sadly, the list is
longer. Many protracted conflicts that deeply affect

women and girls - in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, the
Central African Republic, Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - remain unresolved.

Unfortunately, this year we have also witnessed a
military conflict in Europe, which has caused suffering
to the people of Ukraine. More than half of the registered
internally displaced population in Ukraine - 66 per
cent 4 are women, and 31 per cent are children. We
welcome the steps taken by the Ukrainian Government
to address the internally displaced persons (IDPs)
situation. While many IDPs have been able to return
to their homes in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk,
encouraged by the ceasefire, the overall situation of
IDPs in Ukraine requires a long-term solution for their
economic and social integration in host communities or
successful return home. It is a duty of the international
community, and especially of the Security Council, to
work towards resolving conflicts and to lessen human
suffering.

Unfortunately, women and girls make up about
half of any refugee or internally displaced population.
Therefore, we must pay special attention to their needs.
The situation of refugee and internally displaced
women and girls is often complicated by restricted
access to resources and inequitable access to services
such as education and health, including comprehensive
sexual and reproductive health services, and to training
and livelihoods initiatives.

Improving the educational level of women and
girls is crucial for their political and economic
empowerment. Education is necessary for preventing
the abuse of women and girls' vulnerable situation as
refugees or displaced persons and for helping them to
adjust to life after conflict and integrating them into
their host society if they do not have the option to return
to their home country. Currently, only 12 per cent of
girl refugees attend secondary school.

It is highly regrettable that sexual violence also
occurs in refugee camps. We must take resolute steps
to prevent situations where women seeking refuge from
war and conflict have to face new threats and fear in the
camps instead.

Ensuring accountability for the perpetrators of
sexual violence crimes is crucial to deterring and
ultimately eliminating sexual Violence. It is equally
important for providing justice to victims of those
crimes. As strong supporters of the 2013 Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Estonia and Latvia will focus on the practical
implementation of the commitments to end the use of
rape and sexual violence as a weapon of war.

Sexual and gender-based violence as a war crime or
crime against humanity has been prosecuted primarily
at the international level. The International Criminal
Court therefore has an important role to play when States
lack the capacity or political will to hold perpetrators to
account. Estonia and Latvia are supporting victims of
gender-based and sexual violence in countries affected
by armed conflict through the Trust Fund for Victims
set up by the International Criminal Court.

Unfortunately, even in the United Nations own
peacekeeping missions, sexual violence has been an
issue. We must continue our efforts to provide training
to and raise awareness in all peacekeeping missions
and prioritize the fight against sexual violence when
planning missions. Despite the progress achieved,
continued cases of sexual exploitation threaten the
credibility of the international peacekeeping system and
individual missions. Those cases may also discourage
victims from coming forward. Best practices described
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/693) should
be more widely used to avoid any recurrence of such
situations.

It is self-evident that women's empowerment
is crucial for long-lasting peace and stability. The
participation of women and women's organizations in
policymaking and in post-conflict reconstruction must
be ensured from the outset and throughout the process.
Similarly, it is necessary to support post-conflict
countries in the rebuilding ofjudicial systems in order
to ensure the rule of law and the protection of human
rights.

Next year we will mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Estonia has
included the protection of women in national strategies
on conflict prevention and has adopted a national action
plan to implement the resolution.

Protecting and promoting the full enjoyment of all
human rights by women and girls is one ofthe principal
priorities of the humanitarian aid and development
cooperation policies of Estonia and Latvia. We have
supported the alleviation of the humanitarian situation
of refugees and internally displaced persons, primarily
women and children, in many conflict zones. For
example, Estonia supports the activities aimed at
improving the quality of women's health-related
education in Afghanistan, raising knowledge about
reproductive health in Kyrgyzstan and ending child
marriage in Yemen. As to the elimination of conflict-
related sexual violence, I am glad to say that Estonia
has also been providing financial support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we
will continue to do so.

Latvia has been focusing on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) primarily through its development
cooperation policy and, in close cooperation with civil
society organizations, has engaged in projects aimed at
the advancement of women's rights in different parts of
the world, especially Central Asia.

Over the years, both Estonia and Latvia have
actively promoted women's rights and gender equality
at the international level. In View of the upcoming
twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, we will be even more engaged in
our activities on the advancement of women's rights
and gender equality. We are convinced that the aims of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action are still
very much relevant and should be integrated in the new
post-2015 agenda.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
remarkable achievements have been made at the
normative level, and the international community
has come a long way since the year 2000. However,
challenges remain at the level of implementation. We
look forward to the global review next year and hope
it will advance the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and the follow-up resolutions.

