Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
important debate on women and peace and security. We
commend the briefings by the Secretary-General and
by the Executive Director ofUN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, whom we commend on her excellent
work leading that body, as well as the excellent
testimony given by Ms. Rita Lopidia.

The various forms of violence, discrimination
and gender inequality against women and girls are the
product of a number of factors having political and
economic roots that aggravate inequality. This is a
priority matter for the world today, in particular when,
because of armed conflicts of varying scales, women
are considerably and disproportionately impacted by
war more than ever.

The report presented this year (S/2016/822)
illustrates the fact that there has been some progress
in specific aspects of the agenda on women and peace
and security. An example is the increase in the number
of peace agreements that have specific provisions
relating to gender. We have also seen an increase in the
participation and presence of women in the mediation
processes that have been co-led by the United Nations.
There has also been significant progress with regard to
women and peace and security over the past 15 years
in legislative terms. However, there are still major
challenges. Women in conflict situations continue to
suffer in a disproportionate and brutal manner from the
consequences of armed conflicts. They continue to be
subjected to systematic violence and sexual abuse.
Venezuela urges the international community to
continue working on dealing with exclusion, inequality
and the various forms of sexual violence against women
and girls during armed conflicts. Such inexcusable
instances of violence only reflect and exacerbate the
disequilibrium and imbalance that women and girls are
already subject to in periods before armed conflicts.
During armed conflicts, those problems generate
specific vulnerabilities that require urgent action and
the highest possible political commitment.

We believe that it is a priority to address the
underlying causes that lead to the feminization of
poverty and the lack of opportunities regarding
access to health care, jobs, and political and economic
participation. We must therefore prevent exclusionary
paradigms and stereotypes that ignore the cultural and
ethical diversity and richness of our world. Women
cannot continue be the obj ect of manipulation; they must
not be treated as objects used to advance commercial,
military or political goals. We are convinced that the
participation and contribution of women at all levels
and stages and in areas related to conflict resolution
are vital to preventing such conflicts and to achieving
lasting peace. There can be no international peace and
security if the half of the population that is represented
by women and girls is not included and taken into
consideration.

The bolstering of efforts aimed at ensuring the
effective implementation of resolutions dealing with
women and peace and security demands effective
coordination on the part of the States concerned, the
various relevant offices of the United Nations under
their respective mandates, and the various regional and
subregional mechanisms that deal with the issue. In
advancing those efforts and initiatives we should take
into account the participation of women in each of the
national contexts and conflicts. We should consider the
prevailing political models and the social, cultural and
religious models of each society in order to find the
most appropriate way to address the issue. We ought to
consider specific contexts and build models that can be
fine-tuned to each of those contexts.

It has been shown that, with respect to peace and

security, the percentage of aid given to promoting gender
equality and equity is very low. It is much less than what
we need in order to meet our commitments in that area.
A fundamental aspect of meeting those commitments is
the provision of sufficient resources to create resilience
in zones of conflict and post-conflict - in particular,
training and increasing the national institutional
capacities regarding gender, justice, health and social
welfare, and the empowerment and training needed for
the preparation and implementation of national action
plans on women and peace and security.

One of the other challenges facing the international
community today is the high level of violence and
sexual abuse used as tools of war by terrorist groups
in the Middle East and Africa, particularly the so-
called Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, Jaysh al-Islam,
Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front, Boko Haram and all
other associated armed groups. Thousands of women
and girls have been victims of atrocities and crimes
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
particularly those who fall into ethnic and religious
minorities. Boko Haram has perpetrated more than
2,000 kidnappings of children, 276 of whom continue
to be missing.

It is unacceptable that women and girls throughout
the world continue to be considered the loot of war. It
infringes upon their human condition and is shameful.
There is also the situation of women and girls in
the Palestinian occupied territories, where they are
victims of disproportionate and constant violence,
assassinations and detentions. Other conflicts, such
as those in Syria, Iraq, Libya and Yemen, have made
women and girls the targets of hate, violence and armed
attacks, all of which represent flagrant violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We cannot accept impunity in the
face of such crimes. Venezuela advocates assigning
accountability for all forms of sexual violence, and
there should be exemplary sentences handed down to
those found responsible for such crimes.

In that regard, we repeat our appeal regarding
the texts and resolutions of the Council relating
to the prohibition against the provision of arms or
financial and logistic support to such groups, so that
we can neutralize their operational capacities and
the horrendous practices of sexual exploitation and
violence. We reiterate our appeal to the international
community to strategically coordinate efforts to prevent
sexual violence. There must be a common front linking
all possible efforts to prevent extremist violence and
terrorism.

We must also reiterate our categorical condemnation
of all incidents of sexual abuse and exploitation
committed by foreign armed forces, police or civilians
deployed by the Organization in peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. That includes
those staff who have not been formally deployed on
such missions. In accordance with the provisions of
resolution 2272 (2016), we support the zero-tolerance
policy regarding any sexual violence that is committed
by members of peacekeeping operations or military
missions under the mandate of and supported by the
Security Council. The United Nations should serve
as an example of coherence regarding the importance
of preventing such acts, particularly regarding the
accountability of all personnel of the Organization and
international armed forces who have been authorized
by this body and who commit such crimes.

We reassert our firm belief that women can be
major players in ensuring the emancipation of our
people. In our country women play a vital role in
constructing society. In the process of our Bolivarian
revolution, they have taken very important steps in
the legal and constitutional context aimed at achieving
gender equality at all levels regarding the functionality
of our State's society. At the global level, women should
be working in and benefitting from equal conditions
and opportunities in the development of peace and they
should be included in an equal way. They have wrought
change. In the aforementioned historical process, we
reiterate our country's commitment to continue to work
with determination in following the noble goal of paying
the historical debt of humankind back to women.

