Mr. Ruiicka (Slovakia): Iwould like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on this open debate and on the
interest you have generated by bringing the subject to
the Council. I would like to welcome today's adoption
of resolution 2242 (2000) on women and peace and
security, of which Slovakia is a proud sponsor. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-NMgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Yanar Mohammed, President of the Organization of
Women's Freedom in Iraq, Ms. Julienne Lusenge, Head
of Solidarite' Feminine pour la Paix et le Developpement
Integral, and Ms. Alaa Murabit, of Voice of Libyan
Women, for their briefings. I would particularly like
to highlight the personal involvement of the Secretary-
General and UN-Women, represented here by Assistant
Secretary-General Lakshmi Puri, in promoting this
very important topic on the United Nations agenda.

I align my remarks with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union, and would
also like to share some of my thoughts in my national
capacity.

Fifteen years ago, through its resolution 1325
(2000), the Security Council acknowledged the fact
that women were not playing a large enough role in
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes. It is
indeed symbolic that the fifteenth anniversary of the
resolution's adoption coincides with the twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action. Goal 5 of our recently launched new
development agenda, "Transforming our world: The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development" (General Assembly resolution 70/1), explicitly addresses the need
to achieve gender equality and to engage and empower
all women and girls in our efforts to make our life
and our planet sustainable for future generations. The
targets under Goal 5 provide an appropriate balance of
protection and support for women, with three aimed at
protecting women and girls by ending harmful practices
and the rest aimed at encouraging women's ability to
enter the public sphere in meaningful ways.

I would like to emphasize three words here: role,
ability and power. The role of women in peace and
security is indispensable. The ability of women to
influence negotiations increases the likelihood that
peace agreements will be reached. The power of
women has a positive effect on the durability of peace
and influences other actors, including young people.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has been followed by six others
addressing the importance of women's participation
and leadership. Yet we must admit that women are still
underrepresented in the area of security. The current
share of female negotiators is 9 per cent. Only 4 per cent
of the military components in United Nations missions
are women, and only 54 countries have formulated
national action plans on women and peace and security.

Since 2000, we have made significant progress in
many areas. But we still have much work to do. I would
like to mention just a few areas that we should give
more attention to. They include supporting women's
participation in all peace and security processes
including, among other things, alljustice and mediation
components; strengthening our efforts to increase
women's engagement and advancement throughout the
security sector, particularly in the areas of security
sector reform and emphasizing conflict prevention;
engaging women in key political and decision-making
processes, upholding the rule of law and implementing
non-discriminatory laws, policies and practices. We
should also support new regional and national action
plans on women and peace and security and review
existing ones by, among other things, establishing
inter-agency coordination systems. And we should
make a dedicated effort to advance the inclusion of
women in endeavours to counter violent extremism,
including engagement in preventive and educational
activities for youth.

The global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2010) recommends that the women and peace and
security agenda ought to be included in every aspect
of the United Nations work and that overall women's
participation ought to be strengthened. Therefore, we
must encourage women to move into the public sphere.
The goal - our mission - will be accomplished only
when resolution 1325 (2000) represents the past, and
the equal participation of women and men in all public
spheres of life will encompass the present and future.

