Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to begin by
expressing our sincere condolences on the assassination
of Mr. Andrey Karlov, Ambassador of the Russian
Federation to Ankara, and to the loved ones of the
victims of the terrorist attack in Berlin.

I would like to congratulate Spain on its
remarkable and accomplished two-year term on the
Security Council, and to thank the Spanish delegation
for organizing today's open debate on trafficking in
persons in conflict situations. I commend their efforts
with regard to today's adoption by the Security Council
of resolution 2331 (2016), of which Romania was
a sponsor.

Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union, to which I
would like to add some remarks in my national capacity.

Conflicts are becoming more closely linked to
terrorist activities, while human trafficking plays
an increasing role in the operations of terrorist
organizations, generating revenue and functioning as
an instrument for eliminating those who oppose them.
It is well known that internally displaced and refugee
women and girls in areas controlled by Da'esh have been
sold or forcibly married to fighters in armed groups. The
horrendous crimes committed against Yazidi women
and girls in particular have generated deep sympathy
worldwide. We must help the survivors to cope with the
long-lasting physical and psychological trauma of the
abuse they have endured. We welcome the appointment
of Nadia Murad Basee Taha, a survivor of Da'esh human
trafficking who presented her testimony earlier today,
as a Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors
of Human Trafficking.
Prevention is key in both conflict and non-conflict
situations. The role in prevention of personnel deployed
in United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
enhanced. Developing predeployment curriculums
that emphasize the specifics of trafficking in persons
would help to increase peacekeepers' knowledge of the
problem in order to help them better identify and combat
it. Everyone with access to areas of conflict, including
representatives of civil society and humanitarian actors,
should also receive this type of training.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2016/949)
identifies the complex nexus that exists between
trafficking in persons, organized crime, corruption,
armed conflict and terrorism. But it requires further
mapping. We cannot successfully combat human
trafficking at the national level alone, for cooperation
at the regional and international levels is also key. Civil
society, the private sector and the media should be
major partners in that regard. Ensuring the continued
use of mechanisms to combat money laundering
and the financing of terrorism, including sanctions
regimes, will contribute further to tracking and halting
the problem. We believe we should also make use of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which gives
us a clear mandate for taking immediate and effective
measures to eradicate modern slavery and human
trafficking. After drug trafficking, human trafficking
is the world's single-largest criminal enterprise. Its
commodity is human beings, bought and sold with no
consideration for human dignity. Today there are more
slaves in the world than there have ever been in the
history of humankind - an estimated 27 million adults
and 13 million children.

Romania's national anti-human-trafficking agency
coordinates the activities of the authorities dealing with
human trafficking, as well as protecting and assisting
victims. It is currently cooperating with 64 different
partners, including some from civil society. There is
a dedicated unit within the Romanian national police
of 15 regional teams of specialized officers, totalling
250 operational staff. Our police border department has
400 officers attached to Frontex, the European Border
and Coast Guard Agency, working with European
border and coast guard teams fighting human and drug
trafficking. Twenty-two Romanian debriefing experts
are also helping to identify trafficking victims among
immigrants. Romanian personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping operations receive predeployment
training on how to identify and protect victims of
human trafficking.

Finally, Romania remains fully committed to the
global efforts to deal with this issue. The fight is part of
our collective sense of humanity.

