Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
and expressing, on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Ali
Bongo Ondimba, President and Head of State of the
Gabonese Republic, our deep gratitude for having been
invited to take part in today's debate on the crucial
topic of women and peace and security. I also commend
the presence here of a number of high-level dignitaries,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women.

The adoption by the Council on 31 October 2000
of resolution 1325 (2000) was a historical turning
point in the efforts of the international community
to ensure greater protection of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. Resolution 1325 (2000)
also helped us to recognize the vital role that women
must play in the different stages of the peace process,
namely: conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. Today's debate is an opportunity to
take an objective look at the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the light of
the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the
Fourth World Conference on Women, held in Beijing.

Despite our efforts to combat sexual violence
against women and girls in armed conflict, it must
be acknowledged that the atrocities inflicted against
women and girls never have been as appalling as they
are today. Indeed, as rightly underscored in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/716), we are witnessing
an unprecedented increase in the number of displaced
women, crimes of sexual violence and other forms of
exploitation. That is compounded by the risk associated
with new threats such as climate change, natural
disasters, terrorism and new warfare technologies.
With regard in particular to sexual violence against
women and girls in armed conflict, it should be noted
that these victims may be traumatized when they lack
access to medical care or psychosocial support.

Resolution 1983 (2011), which was adopted by the
Security Council in June 2011 at the initiative of Gabon,
underscores that sexual violence against women and
girls in armed conflict can in some cases constitute a
risk factor in the infection and spread of HIV.

Gabon welcomes the inclusion of resolution 1325
(2000) among the Sustainable Development Goals of
the post-2015 development agenda, particularly Goal 5
regarding gender equality.

The full participation of women in peace
negotiations is all the more important in that it ensures
the inclusion of their concerns in peace agreements.
Similarly, their involvement in preventing violence,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is necessary for the
resolution of conflicts. With respect to the reform of
peacekeeping operations currently under way, more
women must be involved in the theatres of operations,
in mediation and preventive diplomacy efforts, and
in the counseling necessary for the rehabilitation and
reintegration of victims of violence in society.

The number of female staff deployed in
peacekeeping contingents must be increased so as to
ensure a holistic approach to situations on the ground.
Indeed, the presence of more women in these operations
could help to ease tensions, create a trustworthy
environment and expand the missions' mandates in the
field. We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
to promote women to senior positions within the
United Nations system in general and in peacekeeping
operations in particular. The appointment of women to
head the United Nations Mission in South Sudan since
its establishment in 2011 is a perfect illustration thereof.
My country encourages him to continue working to that
end.

I reaffirm my country's commitment to advancing
the issue of women and peace and security. Gabon has
always been a haven for refugees and displaced persons
from countries of the subregion that are experiencing
conflict situations. It is unfortunate that these refugees
and displaced persons consist mostly of women and
children, some of whom are victims of violence
and abuse. Gabon has always worked to provide
appropriate support to these women victims by setting
up specialized health-care infrastructure for displaced
or refugee women, including those living with HIV/
AIDS. Similarly, the integration and empowerment
programmes initiated by the Government of Gabon
have facilitated the availability of arable land.

Close follow-up of the efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) is useful. Gabon reiterates its
willingness to maintain that momentum. To conclude,
Gabon commends the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015) and is dedicated to ensuring its implementation.

