Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: It is an honour to address
the Security Council and to present the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/861) on women and peace and
security. As mentioned by the Chef de Cabinet, the
Secretary-General is currently in the Central African
Republic. It is a pleasure to be accompanied today by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Navamanee Ratna
Patten, who was part of our recent solidarity mission
with the Deputy-Secretary-General to Nigeria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Together, we sought
to enhance our joint support for the women and peace
and security agenda in those countries.

The Secretary-General's report on women and
peace and security celebrates progress and good practice
and sets out his vision and recommendations. It also
brings into the spotlight a number of alarming trends
and setbacks. I am pleased to be here in the Chamber
today with a Colombian activist who represents the
many Colombian women who gave peace in their
country a real chance. That is one example of the
progress we have made. The United Nations has lauded
their achievements and is following their lead, helping
to implement a peace agreement with more than 100
provisions on gender equality. For example, the United
Nations Mission in Colombia engages regularly with
women's organizations and has a record percentage of
women among its military observers - at 11 per cent,
much higher than we have ever seen - with women
representing 48 per cent of civilian staff.

Unfortunately, Colombia is an exception to the
global practice, but one that we can follow. Although
women's absence from peace tables is no longer easily
brushed off as normal, it is still commonplace. Every
year, we track women's overall participation in peace
processes led by the United Nations, the the inclusion
of gender expertise and gender-sensitive provisions in
peace agreements, and the requirement to consult with
women's civil-society organizations. On all of those
indicators, we performed slightly worse than a year ago.

At the Union of Myanmar peace conference in 2016,
before the current crisis, there were seven women and
68 men among the delegates. Recent peace talks on the
Central African Republic hosted by the Community of
Sant'Egidio did not include a single woman. Six years
into the Syrian civil war, and in spite of significant
efforts by the United Nations, partners and the Special
Envoy, women's participation in the peace talks is still
inadequate and often limited to an advisory role.

That political marginalization extends beyond
peace talks. Only 17 countries have an elected woman
Head of State or Government. That includes only one
post-conflict conflict, namely, Liberia, where the
presidency of Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf just ended after
two terms that included democratic elections and
the peaceful transfer of power. That is something to
celebrate. The proportion of women parliamentarians
in conflict and post-conflict countries has stagnated at
16 per cent in the past two years. The use of quotas and
temporary special measures would help. In Somalia, for
instance, representation jumped to nearly 25 per cent,
as compared with 14 per cent in the previous elections.
In local elections in Mali at the end of last year, women
represented 30 per cent of the elected candidates in
Bamako, Gao and Timbuktu, four times higher than the
previous result.

Atrocities against women and girls in armed conflict
have never been more thoroughly documented than they
are now. International and national war crimes courts,
commissions of inquiry, comprehensive mappings of
human rights violations and documentation efforts
led by civil society, expert investigators and reporters
pay much closer attention to sexual and gender-based
violence than ever before. The international community
has more than enough evidence of these crimes in Syria,
South, the Sudan and Central African Republic. In some
of those places we have amassed the most extensive
documentation of sexual and gender-based violence in
history. What we do not have are consequences for the
perpetrators and justice, dignity, and support for the
survivors. That impunity should not continue.

The international community is reaching hundreds
of thousands of survivors with assistance and
programmes, which did not exist one or two decades
ago. But many more cannot be reached owing to lack
of resources, access and security. Many organizations,
including UN-Women, participate in those efforts. I
appreciate the work that has been done by the United
Nations Population Fund with regard to women's
reproductive health and gender-based violence
survivors in some of those complex emergencies.

The consequences of war on women and girls go
beyond sexual violence. In conflict and in natural
disasters gender inequality compounds the many
obstacles to accessing food, water, sanitation, hygiene,
health care, education, employment, housing and legal
identity. Child marriage in Yemen is estimated to have
increased from 32 to 52 per cent, with a significant
minority of girls being married before they are 15
years old. The percentage of female-headed households
tripled during the current crisis, and those households
have significantly lower incomes and more food
insecurity. The percentage of Yemeni women who are
illiterate was projected to reach two thirds, quickly
erasing the hard-won gains in education and literacy,
which took decades to achieve.

The maternal mortality rate in Nigeria is almost
10 times higher in the conflict-affected north-
east than in the south-west. Often, that is the result
of the destruction or closure of medical facilities
due to insecurity. International non-governmental
organizations providing specialized services on
reproductive health and clinical management of rape
recently left the Central African Republic because
they could not protect their aid workers. A maternity
hospital in Hama, Syria, was attacked at least 10 times,
and finally put out of service in April of this year.
Only a few months ago, we celebrated the release of
82 of the Chibok schoolgirls, most of whom are now
young women, after more than three years in captivity.
They are being supported with extensive trauma
counselling, medical care, educational support, child
care, and allowances for personal upkeep and family
visits. UN-Women is glad to be part of that process.
The Council had the opportunity to hear directly from
one of the escapees two weeks ago and everyone in the
room was visibly moved by her testimony. We must do
something to find the girls who are still missing.

At a time when mass abductions, trafficking, forced
recruitment and radicalization are the common tactics
of violent extremist groups, we have much to learn about
the rehabilitationand reintegration of returnees and their
children. The Council has debated peacekeeping reform
multiple times over the past year alone. Peacekeeping
operations are one of our most important tools and the
face of the Organization in many corners of the planet.
We have been calling for more women in peacekeeping
for 17 years. Now, the numbers are still very low. We
have been trying to stamp out sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers for almost as long, and we have
fallen short at every turn. Thankfully, the Secretary-
General is taking that issue very seriously, as we can
see by the current developments. This damages our
effectiveness and our reputation, if we are unable to
cross the line.

I welcome all the measures put in place to change
that, which are detailed in the report of the Secretary-
General on women and peace and security. I encourage
the States Members of the United Nations to consider
using all the tools at their disposal, from conditions
to financial incentives. It is encouraging to see the
reduction in the number of allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse in the Central African Republic,
recent improvements in victim support and assistance
and that a culture of accountability is taking hold. It is
dispiriting, however, to see gender advisory posts being
lost or downgraded due to cuts in the peacekeeping
budget. Gender should not be cut first whenever budgets
must be managed, and for very good reason.

This is a time when we need more gender expertise
and capacity in our missions and country teams, rather
than less. For example, both the United Nations and the
Security Council agree on the importance of gender and
conflict analysis. We are committed to collaborating
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and United Nations partners and to ensuring that that
analysis is reflected in mission planning, mandates,
budgets and drawdown. It is equally crucial for our
prevention work, as gender equality is one of our most
reliable indicators of peace.

The Peacebuilding Fund again exceeded the
minimum 15 per cent target in 2016 and allocated
19.2 per cent of funds to gender equality and
women's empowerment as a principal objective.
That is something to celebrate. I call on all donors to
reward the Peacebuilding Fund's good track record in
financing and driving innovation in gender-responsive
peacebuilding, and to continue supporting this vital
instrument of United Nations work. The instrument
works well. The 15 per cent standard should be adopted
by donors in their bilateral and multilateral cooperation,
and by multi-partner trust funds in conflict-affected
and fragile settings, such as that proposed for Liberia
upon withdrawal of the mission.

With more resources, the Women's Peace and
Humanitarian Fund, the only United Nations fund
dedicated solely to women, peace and security, will be
able to support women's organizations in many more
places, from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to Iraq to Somalia and to Palestine. Women in those
countries should not be left to their own devices when
we have instruments to support them. Women's human
rights defenders are under tremendous attack and we
do not have enough to protect and support them. They
need all our support and the support of the Council. The
least we can do is to protect their space to speak out and
raise their voices.

I would like to applaud the Council for regularly
inviting women from civil society organizations to brief
it when discussing specific countries. I call upon all
members to support the new practice * a commitment
the Council adopted in resolution 2242 (2015). I also
applaud other innovations in the Council's work, such
as the adoption of the first-ever resolution devoted
solely to addressing sexual exploitation and abuse,
and human trafficking and sexual violence and their
intersection with violent extremism, as well as the work
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security. But the Council can and should do more to
put its full political weight behind the implementation
of the agenda.
In closing, we can build on the progress we have
made. The annual report of the Secretary-General has
many examples of the international community's will
to find alliances and form coalitions in pursuit of the
protection and empowerment of women. The regional
roster of women mediators has been established. The
African Women Leaders Network is one example of the
ever-stronger cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union on this issue, which has also
been supported by Germany. A total of 68 countries in
our territories have adopted national action plans, and
63 countries are now part of the new women and peace
and security national focal points network. We know
that with more resources we can do more, as we have
seen with the Peacebuilding Support Office.

We have expanded our work on preventing violent
extremism to over 25 projects across several countries
and regions. More than 60 countries, international
and regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations have united through the Call to Action on
Protection from Gender-based Violence in Emergencies.
A total of 122 countries voted to adopt a historic Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and women-led
groups rightly received the Nobel Peace Prize for their
tireless campaign and organization efforts, which is
another major achievement.

There are some encouraging signals for gender
justice in the international courts, despite some of the
challenges we face. Only a few days ago, the Economic
Community of West African States court in Banjul set a
significant precedent by making its first-everjudgment
on the violation of the Maputo Protocol, which is an
important provision for addressing gender equality
in Africa.

The women and peace and security agenda continues
to expand its footprint on global policymaking. It is now
an essential pillar in global affairs but its advocates
and champions are animated by the conviction that
it is only the beginning. I share that conviction. The
chorus of voices that are appalled by the persistent
political marginalization of women in decision-making
is becoming louder. The number of people who are
determined to find solutions to the human suffering
caused by conflict is growing. This agenda unites us
because people from all over the world, every day,
look up to the United Nations for peace, equality
and inclusion.

