Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein): I wish to commend
the Japanese presidency of the Security Council for
holding this open debate on the role of women in the
consolidation of peace. This initiative is not only
timely because of the sixth anniversary of the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), but it is
also particularly important, because the Peacebuilding
Commission has recently taken up its work and held its
first country-specific meetings. The outcome
documents of both meetings include references to
resolution 1325 (2000).

Whether such references will ensure the
successful involvement of women in the peace
processes in those and other countries will depend, to a
very large extent, on the measures taken and promoted
at the local level. In fact, we have witnessed, in many
processes of peace consolidation and institution-
building, a common pattern of relegating family law
and community dispute resolution to the traditional and
customary sectors, putting them beyond the reach of
the State. Quite often, those sectors show, however,
strong resistance to the idea of equal participation of
women in all decision-making processes, including
peace processes. As long as such types of tacit
arrangements between national and traditional
authorities persist, it will be extremely difficult to
translate national strategies for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) into concrete and sustainable
action.
For this reason, we consider it crucial that the
Peacebuilding Commission establish the necessary
mechanisms to facilitate, together with the countries
concerned, the participation of representatives of local
women's groups and networks who are able to make

the voices and priorities of women from local and rural
communities heard in country- specific configurations.
Such mechanisms will also have to encompass
financial and other support to those groups and
networks in order to enable their effective engagement
with the Peacebuilding Commission.

The Security Council could assume leadership in
such efforts by setting the right example and
increasingly listening to the voices of local women's
groups as well. This would be a clear sign of its
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). While we commend the Security Council for its
measures to further mainstream resolution 1325
(2000), we are concerned that, six years after the
adoption of this historic resolution, the Council still
has no systematic way of ensuring the integration of a
gender perspective in its work. We therefore wish to
join other delegations in calling on the Council to
establish a focal point or an expert level working group
on women, peace and security to ensure the systematic
implementation and integration of resolution 1325
(2000) within its work, including in all resolutions that
establish or extend peacekeeping missions and in terms
of references for Security Council mission trips and
mission reports.

Despite the past efforts of many stakeholders,
there seems to be a continued and widespread lack of
awareness of the fact that women need to be enabled to
play an active role in connection with armed conflict
and peacebuilding. The United Nations and its
operations on the ground are perfectly placed to utilize
this largely untapped resource and, in this respect, we
wish to commend the Secretary-General for his report
on the implementation of the System-wide Action Plan
(S/2006/770). In particular, we welcome the
identification of strengthened inter-agency cooperation
in the field as a priority area for further action to
implement the Plan. In the same connection, we also
support the emphasis placed on closer collaboration
with mechanisms for gender equality and advancement
of women within countries, including women members
of parliament and civil society. In fact, most United
Nations entities that have contributed to the evaluation
have signalled effective partnership with civil society
as a challenge, especially in the field, and pointed out
that the networking with women's organizations was
inadequate.

For many years now, Liechtenstein has been
advocating the appointment of women as special
representatives and envoys of the Secretary-General,
because we are convinced that such appointments can
play a catalytic role for the stronger involvement of
women in peace processes, especially when those
processes reach a more formal stage. They might also
have a positive impact on the level of reporting on
gender-related issues to the Security Council, which is
still unsatisfactory. Therefore, we consider such
appointments as crucial for better implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

The progress made in the representation of
women in these leadership positions since the last time
the Council met on this topic has, however, been
disappointing. We are, of course, aware of the need to
provide the Secretary-General with the names of
potential, well-qualified candidates for such posts, and
we invite all interested States and non-governmental
organizations to join forces in gathering the necessary
information. There is no doubt in our minds that there
are enough suitable candidates for such posts. We just
have to look for them.

