Mr. Moustapha (Chad) (spoke in French): His
Excellency Ambassador CherifMahamat Zene, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Chad should have
liked to take part personally in this important high-
level meeting but could not make the trip for reasons
of timing. He has instructed me to deliver, on behalf of
Chad, the following statement to the Council:

"I would first like to congratulate Sweden on
its accession to the presidency of the Council for
the month of July, and to thank it for organizing
this important open debate on a very important
topic. I warmly note the moving testimony offered
by Ms. Wallstrom on the situation of women in the
Lake Chad region.

"I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for her briefing and for the riveting scenario she
painted of the current challenges facing Chad.
I further offer our thanks to Ms. Bineta Diop,
African Union Special Envoy for Women, Peace
and Security, and commend her commitment to
helping Chad to implement its action plan arising
from resolution 1325 (2000).

"Chad was one of the destinations of a joint
United Nations-African Union-Sweden mission
during the Swedish presidency of the Security
Council, which was led by Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed. I should like to
thank Ms. Mohammed, and through her the entire
delegation and the United Nations, for having
visited my country, including the city of B01, the
place in the Lake Chad region most afflicted by the
barbaric terrorist attacks of Boko Haram. The field
visit to the region, where refugees and internally
displaced persons are concentrated, mostly women
and children, allowed the mission to see at first
hand the tragic consequences of the combined
effects of terrorist attacks and climate change on
vulnerable victims of those two phenomena.

"The situation in the region reflects the
precariousness of people's living conditions,
especially women, exposed to the adverse
consequences of climate change on development
and to the effects of the conflict afflicting the
neighbourhood. The crises and conflicts in Chad's
vicinity have also given rise to a wave of refugees
and internally displaced persons, most of whom are
women and children, whose numbers are estimated
to exceed 700,000 people on Chad's territory.
Those refugees and displaced persons share with
their hosts the scarce resources on which they
depend upon for their daily survival. At the same
time, that situation puts pressure on the economic
and environmental conditions in the region.

"Given that very complex and fragile context,
courageous, determined and resilient women are
daily heroically facing every obstacle to ensure the
survival of their families. Given the role and the

status of women in the process of development and
crisis management, the Government of Chad has
undertaken major reforms to address the situation
of women so as to eliminate all the existing
inequalities, discrimination and gender-based
violence by 2030. The momentum generated by that
Government reform dovetails with the goals set out
by resolution 1325 (2000) and provides a sound
foundation for the drafting under way of a plan of
action for the resolution's full implementation. We
look forward with anticipation to the contribution
of UN-Women in that regard.

"Along the same lines, in addition to the specific
measures undertaken with regard to women,
which include providing microcredit to promote
revenue-generating activity, thereby improving
women's living standards, the Government is
especially focusing on girls' education and adult
literacy, without which an awareness of those
reforms as well as their impact will be limited.

"Moreover, by way of a law adopted on
22 May, the Government of Chad has established
phased parity between men and women when it
comes to both elected and appointed office, with
the immediate implementation of a 30 per cent
quota for women. Likewise, a law adopted in 2015
prohibits girls being married before the age of 18,
while a prison sentence of five to 10 years has
been added to the criminal code for any individual
who in any way forces a minor into marriage.
Religious and civil society leaders made their
contributions on that issue and were made aware
of the importance of their participation in the fight
against early marriage.

"The gender issue is a key facet and a priority
for our Government in crafting and implementing
development policies. The joint efforts to that
end by national authorities and United Nations
agencies play an important part. However, the
road ahead is long and strewn with obstacles. The
economic difficulties faced by Chad constrain the
Government's ability to act, which has already been
significantly limited by our military commitments
in combating terrorism in the Lake Chad basin
and Sahel. Given the mounting terrorist threat,
Chad unfortunately finds itself forced to allocate
its scarce resources to the security of the country
and the subregion, to the detriment of economic
and social development - for there can be no

peace or stability, and much less development,
without security.

"We therefore launch an appeal to all our
development partners, including the United
Nations, for a shift in approach to partnership
to transition from conventional humanitarian
assistance to pooled efforts focused on sustainable
development and resilience. In that regard, we
commend the envisaged recalibration of the United
Nations Comprehensive Strategy for the Sahel
through the Sahel support plan. We underscore the
need for robust involvement in the review process
by the countries concerned, including taking
their priorities into account. Following decades
of humanitarian and development assistance, we
regret that the impact of the results on the target
populations fall woefully short of expectations.
On its path towards social and economic
development - a guarantor for peace, stability
and security - is drawing the lessons of its past
experience to henceforth measure the efforts of
its development partners against concrete results
that can be measured in terms of improvement in
people's living conditions.

"In conclusion, I hope that the Deputy
Secretary-General's vision - in which, again,
you participated, Madam President - will open a
new chapter in our partnership so that Chad can
be supported in its efforts aimed at promoting
sustainable development by improving the status of
women in line with our national development plan,
which was the subject ofa round table organized last
September in Paris. Honouring the pledges made
by all our partners at that meeting - and we would
like to thank them here - is essential for Chad and
for the empowerment of women and girls."

