Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg commends the Ugandan presidency of the
Council for having organized this open debate to mark
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) - the first resolution of the Council
specifically to address the impact of war on women
and their role in peacemaking.

Women and girls are often the first victims of
conflict, and they have specific needs after conflict
ends that must be taken into account if the conflict is to
be brought to a lasting end. It is also critical that
women be more involved from the outset in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts at all levels in
order to ensure their better participation in
development efforts and to increase the likelihood that
peace will last.

The seven-point action plan presented by the
Secretary-General in his recent report on women's
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466) is an
excellent tool in that respect. If implemented, it will
serve as a valuable contribution to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The important debate of
13 October on post-conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.6396) afforded the Security Council an
opportunity to consider that report for the first time,
and we hope that it will rapidly result in concrete
follow-up to the proposed plan of action.

As the representative of the European Union will
underscore in his statement, with which Luxembourg
fully associates itself, 10 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) we regret to note that the
progress achieved in its implementation and in the
implementation of its follow-up resolution remains
unsatisfactory. I should like to commend the very
candid analysis contained in the Secretary-General's
most recent report, in which he concludes that one of
the main obstacles to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) is the lack of a harmonized and
coordinated approach in the context of a clear
framework with concrete and specific objectives and a
set of results indicators. We encourage the Secretary-
General to pursue his intention to reforge the system-
wide plan of action as a strategic planning tool. A
significant role in that task must fall to the new United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women.

Luxembourg supports the recommendations
elaborated by the Secretary-General in his report.
Increased efforts are necessary at all levels, including
the national level, to ensure the full implementation of

resolution 1325 (2000). Within the framework of its
national gender equality plan, Luxembourg is
committed to systematic support for initiatives aimed
at incorporating the gender perspective into the work
of international and regional organizations, and to
ensuring that it is taken into account in conflict and
post-conflict situations. My country also strives to
ensure the systematic taking into account of the gender
perspective in its cooperation projects and
humanitarian action to better achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. We fully support the peace
initiatives undertaken by local women's groups and the
work of non-governmental organizations to ensure the
equal participation of men and women in post-conflict
situations.

Our national plan of action also provides for an
increase in the percentage of women and men, be they
civilian or military, who are specifically trained in
gender issues to participate in peacekeeping operations.
Allow me to cite a specific example of our support.
The "Women and war" project, an initiative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, has enabled
us to elaborate guidelines for a multidisciplinary
approach to the prevention of and fight against sexual
violence.

Ten years ago, resolution 1325 (2000) requested
all parties to armed conflict to take specific steps to
protect women and girls against acts of gender-based
violence, especially rape and other forms of sexual
abuse. It also emphasized that all States bear the
responsibility to put an end to impunity and to bring to
justice those who have been accused of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, including all
forms of sexual and other violence against women and
girls. The acts of mass rape that were committed this
summer in North Kivu demonstrated in the most brutal
way that we are very far from having put an end to the
use of sexual violence as a tool of war.
In September, my Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs told the General Assembly
(see A/65/PV.14) that such brazen violations of human
rights must be tolerated no longer. Impunity must end,
and the fight against impunity cannot remain an
abstract objective, but must become an effective and
concrete reality whose success we must all work
towards together.

I would like to encourage the Security Council to
step up its efforts in the fight against impunity and to
impose targeted sanctions against all parties
responsible for grave violations of human rights and
women rights, including perpetrators of sexual
violence.

My delegation warmly welcomes the Council's
decision to recommend the use of the indicators drafted
by the Secretary-General, and encourages all
stakeholders to operationalize them as rapidly as
possible. Such a clear, ongoing and comprehensive
follow-up mechanism will assist Member States, the
United Nations system and the Security Council to
assess the progress achieved and to strengthen the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

However, on a note of slight disappointment, we
would have liked to see the Council at the same time
set up a working group to evaluate progress achieved
based on the annual reports of the Secretary-General
and to formulate recommendations for the Council on
the best possible way to fill the gaps and to meet the
challenges in order to accelerate such implementation.

Before I conclude, allow me to pay tribute to the
essential role played by both civil society and women's
organizations in the creation and implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Without their commitment and
contributions, the issue of women, peace and security
would never have enjoyed the attention it merits and
must without question continue to enjoy in the future.

