Mr. Sorcar (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
having organized this open debate on women, peace
and security. The concept paper that you have
submitted (5/2008/655) has been very useful to us and,
I believe, to many other delegations.

Women's contributions to peace have long been
ignored and underestimated. They tend to fade into the
background when official peace negotiations begin.
Such negotiations are often identified as male domains
and considered to be closer to a man's reality than to a
woman's. However, peace is much more than the
ending of direct conflict, which is often fought by men.
That lacuna leads to the formulation of narrow policies
and programmes in which the concerns of women are
not adequately addressed. It is therefore important to
appreciate the complex way the gender dimension
interacts with conflict resolution.

The realignment of gender roles and positions
should be an integral part of our approach to the
challenge of rebuilding war-torn societies. The
international commitment to engaging women in peace
talks should be honoured by preparing concrete
guidelines for enabling women's participation as part
of negotiating delegations and in expert and observer
roles.

Involving women in peace initiatives in greater
numbers alone cannot ensure their equal participation
or the quality of their engagement. Peace negotiations
should involve informed cross-sections of women,
including those directly affected by conflicts, who have
the expertise to contribute and make a difference in

engagement. While creating a greater political space
for women, States must also ensure that women may
operate there in their own right. To that end, States
must invest in capacity-building to emphasize women's
full role in conflict resolution.

Concerted efforts are needed for research,
analysis and knowledge-sharing on the situation of
women and girls in conflict situations to inform
effective policy and programme interventions. A
monitoring system based on non-discriminatory
standards should be established to reflect the real
progress made and to identify the gaps in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). A working
group on women, peace and security may be useful in
that regard. Use of information and communication
technology tools and the media can raise public
awareness and advocate for the strengths of women in
promoting peace and security around the world.

The Council should pursue a stronger and more
systematic working relationship with civil society,
non-governmental organizations and women's
organizations through the increased use of the Arria
Formula meetings or similar arrangements at all levels.
National action plans and initiatives must take up
gender mainstreaming for peace and security rather
than merely fill up gender quotas. Such national efforts
should undergo gender auditing. While national plans
are formulated, efforts should be made to integrate
women who are direct stakeholders in the peace
process. However, in order to have the desired impact
on the ground, the work of national Governments must
be sustained by increased international cooperation.
The United Nations gender machinery should also be
provided with adequate resources to complement
national efforts.

Multidimensional peacekeeping operations have a
large potential to address the security and well-being of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations. Troop-
and police-contributing countries must continue to
increase the numbers of uniformed and civilian female
personnel. They should also meet their obligations to
ensure that pre-deployment training for their military
and civilian personnel is complemented with mission-
specific training, community orientation and
familiarization with local gender dynamics.
Pre-deployment training should also include
familiarization with the shift of orientation in civilian
protection, which considers the addressing of sexual
violence as fundamental to the achievement of mission

objectives. Deployments should routinely include
personnel with expertise in gender issues and in
addressing sexual violence who can inform deployment
planning and resourcing.

A reinforced commitment to the integration of a
gender perspective is also necessary to transform the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations into a
body that actively contributes to larger efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). We welcome the
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) and believe that it
will further facilitate the United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding endeavours.

Bangladesh supports a greater role for women in
all United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions. As one of the largest troop-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Bangladesh is ever conscious of our responsibility to
incorporate the gender dimension, particularly the
essential elements of resolution 1325 (2000), into the
pre-deployment training of peacekeepers. In the
coming days, the number of women in peacekeeping
forces from Bangladesh is set to increase to ensure the
gender balance in our share of the deployment.

The Peacebuilding Commission should fully
implement resolution 1325 (2000) in conflict
resolution, crisis management and post-conflict
rehabilitation. As a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we remain wary of integrating gender
perspectives into the formulation of integrated
peacebuilding strategies.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
world has witnessed heightened international attention
devoted to the enhancement of the role of women in
peace and security. Nevertheless, the challenges still
outpace the achievements. Women continue to languish
in all conflict and post-conflict situations. Failure to
address their concerns in formal peace processes has
made peace and development unsustainable. The
international community needs to summon all its
political will to raise a greater sense of urgency and
consciousness among all stakeholders to create an
environment in which the world's women are free from
the fallout of wars and conflicts.

