Mr. Silva (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, I thank you
for giving me this opportunity to participate in this
important debate. Also, we appreciate the briefings by
the Under-Secretary-General for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women and Executive Director of
UN Women, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the President of the
Economic and Social Council and the civil society
representative.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) 10 years ago was a landmark in our efforts to
recognize women's contribution to the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security and their specific
needs and concerns during and in the aftermath of
armed conflicts. In many ways, today's debate is an
assessment of the evolution of this issue as well as an
opportunity to identify the challenges that lie ahead.
Although the devastation stemming from armed
conflicts does not discriminate along gender lines, it is
known that women and children, particularly girls,
often experience a disproportionate share of harm
during and in the aftermath of armed conflicts.

It is known that in the context of some armed
conflicts involving non-State actors, young girls are
often forced into early and underage marriages and
early pregnancies in order to avoid forcible recruitment
into the fighting ranks by non-State actors. Such
practices have serious health implications for the
young mothers and their children.

The practice of recruiting young women and girls
as suicide bombers - undoubtedly a vicious and
obnoxious practice - not only snuffs out their worldly
aspirations but also deprives their communities and
societies of their productive contributions. The
perpetration of sexual violence against women leaves
them debilitated psychologically and, in most
instances, physically as well.

The challenges faced by women in post-conflict
environments remain formidable. Often, they are forced
to contend with family dislocation, social ostracism and
shattered livelihoods. Some face the everyday reality of
being single mothers. In many ways, a level playing
field in terms of gender equity continues to elude
women in post-conflict contexts as well. Those are
serious issues that call for the urgent and undivided
attention of the international community.

Sri Lanka, having grappled with a virulent form
of terrorism perpetrated by the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE), is fully cognizant of the
despicable reality that clouded the lives of the young
girls and women in the north and east of our country.
The Council will recall that Sri Lanka had to intervene
in the Council's deliberations under resolutions 1539
(2004) and 1612 (2005), on children and armed
conflict, to focus attention on the abhorrent practice of
child recruitment for combat by LTTE terrorists and on
the deployment of young women as suicide bombers.

With the defeat of terrorism in May 2009, through
a massive humanitarian rescue mission our Government
took concerted action to rehabilitate and reintegrate all
former child combatants. Among them, 351 were girls.
Knowing that those children had been forced to take up
guns instead of school books, the Government of Sri
Lanka adopted a prudent, practical and compassionate
approach towards their reintegration, an approach based
on the principles of women's empowerment, livelihood
training, psychosocial support and, above all,
restorative justice.

For those who missed the opportunity to
experience a childhood and a formal education,
arrangements have been made through catch-up
schools to enable them to complete examinations for
the general certificate of education, irrespective of
their current age. The State and society view them as
Victims and not as perpetrators. The lessons learned
and the good practices adopted by Sri Lanka in the
arduous process of rapidly restoring the future of those
children deserve appreciation. Ours is a success story
that has no parallel elsewhere.

With regard to former adult LTTE cadres, the
Government has placed high priority on their social
and economic reintegration. In recognition of that
priority, a vocational, technical and language-training
programme has been developed under our accelerated
skills acquisition programme. It includes, among other

things, training in information technology, heavy
machinery operation and the electrical, mechanical and
apparel sectors. That is intended to enable former
LTTE members to participate fully in the various
employment opportunities that are being created along
with the ongoing massive infrastructure and other
development projects in the north and the east of our
country.

Furthermore, with a view to harnessing the
potential of the social integration and social
development of those former combatants, the ministry
in charge of rehabilitation, in collaboration with the
Hindu Congress and the Commissioner-General for
Rehabilitation, organized a wedding ceremony for 53
couples who wished to get married. An equal number
of houses were constructed for the newlyweds to
complete their rehabilitation programme as husband
and wife.

We are mindful of the challenges before us on the
larger subject of women and peace and security. On the
policy level, programmes have already been identified
to address the critical issues facing women and girls in
the post-conflict phase. We are especially focused on
the special needs of thousands of widows and orphans.
However, resource limitations are a challenge in our
efforts to accelerate and implement the envisaged
ameliorative programmes for those segments of the
population. We sincerely thank our friends in the
international community for their generous support for
the livelihood development programme for the
country's widows.

Despite the resource challenges, it is nevertheless
heartening to note that the 2010 Global Gender Gap
Report of the World Economic Forum ranks Sri Lanka
at number 16 in the area of gender parity. In page 27,
the report notes that

"Sri Lanka is distinctive for being the only
South Asian country in the top 20 for the fourth
consecutive year. Sri Lanka's performance
remains steady as it maintains the same rank as
2009. In addition to higher-than-average
performance in education and health, Sri Lanka
continues to hold a privileged position regarding
political empowerment."

Sri Lanka will conduct a national population
census in 2011 for the entire country, the first such
country-wide census since 1981. The census will pave
the way for adopting gender disaggregated methods to
address data gaps in areas such as women and girls
with disabilities and their access to educational and
health services. Such focused census-taking will
facilitate the development of policy inputs to initiate
and strengthen programmes for women and girls in
areas that have escaped adequate policy focus. There is
no doubt that consolidated action will further empower
women and girls in post-conflict Sri Lanka.

We believe that the proliferation of small arms
increases the risk of interpersonal violence, including
domestic and societal violence, which often continue
after conflicts. Hence, curbing the spread of small arms
will be a step in the right direction in minimizing
gender-based violence.

As resolution 1325 (2000) focuses extensively on
women's role in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, Sri
Lanka stands ready to extend its support to achieve
gender parity in United Nations peacekeeping activities
and in carrying out gender-related mandates of
peacekeeping missions. Necessary background efforts,
including pre-deployment training, have been
completed to deploy an all-female battalion, comprised
of 855 personnel and 28 female officers, at any given
time. Sri Lanka is also willing to share its experiences
in this area with other countries in need of such
assistance, through relevant United Nations agencies.

We remain hopeful that the Council will make
every effort to ensure that the indicators proposed for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) are also
acceptable to, and achievable by, all Member States.
That is especially so given our varying levels of
development and prevailing socio-economic conditions.

We wish to caution, however, that as one third of
the proposed indicators in the Secretary-General's
report are qualitative in nature, a balanced, transparent
and objective approach must be exercised in the
selection of data. Also, it is important to carefully
design, through extensive consultations, the methods
that would be used to verify the quantitative data. After
all, it is the collective responsibility and objective of
all of us Member States to ensure a world free, safe
and fair for all women and girls.

