Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank you, Sir, for your work as
President of the Council for this month. I wish you
every success in your work. I also thank all speakers
for their very interesting contributions.

I wish to begin by stressing the importance of
today's debate concerning the protection challenges
and needs faced by women and girls in armed conflict
and post-conflict settings. Significant progress has
been made since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent relevant resolutions in establishing
standards and legal frameworks to protect women
and girls in armed conflict. Those resolutions are all
considered to be turning points in the way in which the
international community views the humanitarian needs
of women in conflict and post-conflicts situations.

Despite all this, we have seen an unprecedented
increase in the number of victims, especially in the
Middle East and Africa. Indeed, thousands of women
and girls in Syria have been victims of sexual violence,
including rape. In the Central African Republic, the
rape of women and girls has facilitated the widespread
transmission of the HIV virus. In South Sudan, the
latest report of the Secretary-General on conflict-
related sexual violence (S/2014/181) also cites incidents
of abduction and forced marriage.
The fight against impunity for the perpetrators of
such crimes against women and girls in armed conflict
is one of the greatest challenges that we face on the
ground. In that context, we stress the importance of
United Nations assistance to help the countries
concerned in strengthening their legal and judicial
institutions. Those countries must be able to prosecute
the guilty and ensure justice in order to guarantee the
protection of civilians, especially women and girls. In
some cases, and to that end the international community
must establish commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions to investigate these crimes.

We also invite the Security Council to consider
strengthening its cooperation with the International
Criminal Court in referring the most odious crimes.
In that context, peacekeeping operations must also
cooperate with national institutions to heighten
awareness and exert pressure to provide greater
protection and ensure that the perpetrators are brought
to justice. United Nations entities must also assist
countries in building a culture of respect and equality
and in establishing legal frameworks for women.

Another major challenge is the difficulty of
compelling non-State actors to respect international
humanitarian law. We must adopt sustainable strategies,
based on cooperation between the international
community and United Nations authorities, for
prosecuting the perpetrators of crimes against women
and girls. We must also ensure that peace agreements
do not undermine that responsibility.

To the best of its abilities, Jordan is seeking to
provide the best possible protection to Syrian refugees,
in particular women and girls. All refugees receive a
human rights handbook when they arrive in Jordan
to inform them of their rights and prevent their
exploitation. Refugees are welcome in public schools;
there are today some 100,000 Syrian girls studying in
our schools within and outside the camps. Jordanian
organizations also organize health-care training for
Syrian women and girls.

We have taken significant measures to protect
women and girls in conflict situations. We have
strengthenedthe participation ofwomeninpeacekeeping
operations and in decision-making processes. The
Jordanian armed forces have enhanced the role of
women in the military by increasing their participation
in peacekeeping operations and humanitarian missions,
and in the medical services by increasing their presence
in field hospitals in conflict zones. Jordanian military
women have played an important role in providing care
for Syrian refugees. We believe that the participation of
women in United Nations missions must be a priority,
and stress the importance of organizing training in that
area.

In conclusion, we believe that the protection of
civilians, in particular women and girls, should be
addressed independently of other issues related to
women. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we must strengthen our activities in this field in
order to build a better future for women and girls.

