The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.

I thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
for his briefing. We welcome the increasing emphasis
on ensuring that peacebuilding activities, especially in
post-conflict situations, are nationally owned and
carried out in a more coordinated, more coherent and
more effective way. Peacebuilding is premised on the
need to address the root causes of conflict as well as
developing national institutions and conditions that are
conducive to sustainable peace and development.

The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2010/386) has highlighted a number of areas in
which progress is being made towards improving
United Nations peacebuilding efforts. We particularly
welcome the increasing engagement with national
authorities on peacebuilding priorities, support for
national capacity and development, and improving the
mobilization of resources for peacebuilding.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
there is still a lot of work to be done. It is therefore
essential that the United Nations and the wider
international community intensify efforts towards a
more effective and coherent approach to peacebuilding,
with an emphasis on delivering an impact on the
ground. There is a need for focusing more on
delivering tangible dividends, including provision of
basic services and improvement of the standard of
living of the population. It is also important to
strengthen partnerships amongst Member States,
regional and subregional organizations, international
financial institutions and other actors, since
peacebuilding is a collective effort.

My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on women's participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466). The report is
comprehensive, and its action plan contains very useful
recommendations whose implementation, as
appropriate, will reinforce the overall agenda for action
to improve United Nations peacebuilding efforts.

Uganda reiterates the importance of women's
equal participation and full involvement in
peacebuilding, including in the development and
implementation of post-conflict strategies. The
engagement of all relevant United Nations agencies,
including the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN Women), as well as other actors, in the
consideration and implementation of the action plan
will be critical.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Joao
Gomes Cravinho, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Portugal. On behalf of the Council,
I wish to extend a warm welcome to Mr. Cravinho.

