Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to commend you, Sir, for your decisive and
outstanding performance as President of the Security
Council during a particularly demanding month, and to
thank you for giving me the opportunity to take part in
this debate.

Just three months ago, in this very Chamber, we
had an opportunity to reflect on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and

security, which reaffirmed the important role of women
in the prevention of conflict, in peace-building and in
post-conflict reconstruction. Today, we have another
important element to enrich our discussion: the report
of the Secretary-General on women, peace and
security. Because of its comprehensiveness and the
aptness of its recommendations, we consider it to be a
core document for the future treatment of this
important subject.

We would also like to acknowledge the
contribution of the independent experts of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, Ms. Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf and Ms. Elizabeth Rehn, and we
welcome the statement to be made later by the
representative of Austria, on behalf of the Human
Security Network, of which Chile is a part.

The Fourth World Conference on Women is
considered to have laid the groundwork for future
discussions about the role of women in conflict
resolution and the maintenance of peace at all levels.
Since then, the international community has witnessed
a sharp and steady increase in multilateral initiatives to
empower women so that they can play a more
important role in decision-making with regard to
conflicts. Although useful, those initiatives are still
insufficient. We would therefore like to recall the
Secretary-General's statement that peace is
indissolubly linked to equality between women and
men and to development.

Even as I deliver this statement, entire
communities are suffering from the consequences of
armed conflict and terrorism. Women and girls in
particular are affected, because of their status in society
and their gender. Their human rights are systematically
violated to a degree that can only be guessed at.

There are a number of measures that we can take
to prevent this from continuing. As we stated on a
similar occasion in this very Chamber, these include
effective steps to remove the barriers that prevent
women from effectively participating in decision-
making and from gaining access to the circles of
power. In this connection, my country supports the
View that mainstreaming a gender perspective into
peacekeeping operations must be given priority in
governmental agendas.

We agree with, and consider it necessary to
highlight, the point made in the report of the Secretary-
General that the mainstreaming of a gender perspective
in peacekeeping operations is a key requirement for
promoting gender equality in a sustainable manner over
time. The Secretary-General clearly states that this lays
the foundation for rebuilding societies after conflict
and commonly determines the political, civil, economic
and social structures in post-conflict situations. We also
agree that this is a responsibility incumbent upon all of
us, men and women alike.

We reiterate our view that it is essential to
increase the number of women appointed as special
representatives or envoys of the Secretary-General to
undertake peace missions, and we call for a greater
presence of women as military observers, as members
of civilian police forces and as humanitarian and
human rights personnel.

Chile believes that the promotion of the role of
women in society, particularly political participation, is
a State priority. Our country has actively participated in
all the international debates on this topic and has
fulfilled out all the commitments it has undertaken. It
is in this context that it welcomed with great
enthusiasm and renewed optimism the Council's
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and that it today
endorses the report of the Secretary-General because of
its validity.

The time has come to bridge the gap between
intentions and reality. In our many and extensive
discussions, we have touched upon practically all
elements related to the mainstreaming of a gender
perspective in the various phases of all peace
processes. We already have a great deal of information
on the problems of women and children on the ground
and on their strengths and weaknesses. We have
pledged to adopt a series of measures, and we have
succeeded in creating a solid international legal
framework. However, in practice, we still have not
been able to implement all of those measures.

This is a task for Governments, the United
Nations system and civil society alike. We cannot fail
to mention the role that has been recognized as
belonging to civil society, particularly to the networks
of women's organizations working on the ground. That
is very clearly stated in the report of the Secretary-
General. Chile's work in these and other areas is of
particular importance, as demonstrated by our
numerous activities in conjunction with civil society.
organizations

In the framework of our discussion on the need to
work towards implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), we welcome the concrete proposal made
yesterday by the representative of the United Kingdom:
each year to request a member of the Council to
supervise the implementation of our decisions on the
mainstreaming of a gender perspective, working with
the relevant entities of the Secretariat to achieve that
goal.

Lastly, we reiterate our hope that the international
Conference on Women in Peace Operations, which will
be held in Chile on 4 and 5 November, and which we
have organized together with the Presidency of the
European Union - as the representative of Denmark
mentioned yesterday - will open new avenues for the
practical implementation of the item under discussion.
Similarly, we hope that the report before the Council
today and the important debate in which we have
participated will serve to enrich those discussions.

