Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express our condolences to the Russian
Federation and the family of the Russian Ambassador,
a victim of terrorism, as well as to Germany and the
families affected by yesterday's attack there.

We thank Spain for its efforts as President of
the Security Council and for having convened this
important debate. We wish them every success. We
also thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his report on the implementation
of measures to counter trafficking in persons
(S/2016/949). With the end of his mandate approaching,
I thank him for all of his efforts over the past 10 years
and wish him every success in the future.

We welcome the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children, and her
report to the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/32/41), in
which she stresses the importance of the fight against
human trafficking, particularly in conflict zones.
We also welcome Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
Ms. Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha and Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan, for
their briefings.

Last year, we firmly condemned human trafficking
in zones affected by armed conflict. Today, the Council
adopted resolution 2331 (2016) on that heinous crime,
and we hope that it will spearhead international efforts
to address human trafficking by terrorist groups. It is
certain that human trafficking is the object of attention
on the part of the international community because it
is an attack on the fundamental rights and dignity of
humankind. Terrorist groups carry out the worst forms
of slavery. We have heard alarming accounts today of
those practices, which are contrary to all our values
and principles. The international community must
confront that phenomenon, mindful of the fact that such
acts lead to disparity and strife, and create a vicious
circle of violence.

The large-scale movement of refugees, now an
unprecedented flow, is directly related to trafficking in
human beings. The United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime 2016 Global Report on Traflicking in Persons
clearly indicates an increase in the number of victims
resulting from the conflicts in Somalia, Syria, the
Middle East and other regions of the world. For that
reason, there is a need to put an end to violence, so as to
preserve the dignity of populations as we put an end to
the phenomenon of trafficking.

As an international community, it behooves us to
consider the problem in a comprehensive manner. We
have faced this challenge for the past few years. A great
many of us have focused on certain specific areas and
criminal organizations, but what about other terrorist
organizations, such as Boko Haram or Al-Shabaab?
What we require is a comprehensive, holistic approach
that focuses on development in order to ensure that we
can pool our efforts to stand behind the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and thereby build a world
of peace that is safe and free from violence.

Terrorist groups such as Da'esh, Boko Haram
or the Lord's Resistance Army abduct women and
children, and force them to become combatants or sell
them as slaves. All such actions can be characterized
as trafficking in human beings. Today, as we consider
the violence carried out against the Yazidis in Iraq by
Da'esh, Jordan believes that we need to step up our
efforts to fight against trafficking in human beings,
especially by terrorist organizations. That will require
multifaceted action on all levels - local, regional and
international. Within the framework of a strategy for
prevention, I would like to mention a few elements.

First, there is a need to confront extremist thought.
Da'esh is not a Muslim group. It is a terrorist group, and
as such needs to be eliminated. There is a need to spread
the values of tolerance and dialogue among religions
and faiths, and to disseminate the concept of the
Muslim religion as a religion of tolerance. His Majesty
King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein has always stood as a
champion and advocate of those values. There is also a
need to promote the inclusion of youth in efforts to forge
peace and fight against violent extremism. They must
also be stakeholders in any decisions that are taken.

Within the framework of the fight against impunity,
we welcome the recommendations of the Secretary-
General and urge all States that have not yet done so
to ratify all the protocols and necessary instruments
to ensure that we are in a position to fight against
trafficking in human beings through strategies that
can face up to the challenge. To that end, we should
align the existing criteria and create a database on the
phenomenon in areas of conflict. In addition, we should
also mobilize all the necessary resources to do so.

My country has legislation that criminalizes
trafficking in human beings. My country is also a party
to numerous United Nations instruments for the fight
against transnational organized crime. We have spared
no effort to suppress such crimes by working with all
of the relevant parties, as well as through our national,
regional and international policies of cooperation. All
bodies can contribute to the fight against trafficking in
human beings, as well as the protection and rehabilitation
of the victims. For example, Jordan, through its
coordination with several United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations, has created
an association for Syrian refugee children, aimed at
promoting their education and at providing them with
the necessary psychological and social services.

Finally, Jordan will continue to spare no effort to
fight against trafficking in human beings, especially
that carried out by terrorist groups. We will continue our
cooperation aimed at eliminating that phenomenon and
at supporting protective measures against that scourge.

