Ms. Cash (Australia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Canada, New Zealand
and my own country, Australia. We thank the United
Kingdom for convening this debate.

Every country in the world is affected by the
scourge of modern slavery, either through local
exploitation or as a point of origin, transit or destination
for trafficking victims. Eradicating slavery and sexual
violence, in particular in conflict situations, is an
essential precondition for achieving the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and must be addressed as
a matter of urgency. We have a shared responsibility
to disrupt this evil trade and address its root causes.
No single State or organization can do that alone. Our
individual efforts are important; however, regional and
global cooperation will be the key to success.

We know that conflict and instability and the
resulting economic desperation amplify the risk of
forced labour for vulnerable people. In Australia, I
recently established the Migrant Worker Task Force,
which will develop strategies and make improvements
to stamp out the exploitation of vulnerable workers.
We have also launched an inquiry into whether
Australia should follow the United Kingdom's lead
and adopt legislation to combat modern slavery. And
Australia's bid for membership in the Human Rights
Council for the period 2018-2020 reflects our strong
commitment to the promotion and protection of human
rights internationally.

Canada has taken a strong stance on the prevention
of all forms of exploitation and violence against women
and girls in situations of conflict. In particular, Canada
will welcome approximately 1,200 vulnerable Yazidi
women and children who have been subjected to the
most heinous forms of sexual exploitation.

New Zealand has secured a landmark trafficking
conviction, which resulted in a substantial sentence
and an order to pay reparations. New Zealand is also
currently planning to expand and update its national
plan of action to combat trafficking, in order to
incorporate slavery and forced labour.

The International Labour Organization estimates
that 21 million people worldwide are subject to forced
labour. More than 56 per cent of them are in the Asia-
Pacific region. Australia and New Zealand are working
with countries in the region to stamp out those barbaric
and criminal practices. We work in partnership with
civil society and regional forums to eliminate the
drivers of vulnerability, build the capacity of local
authorities and assist victims of those terrible crimes.
That includes addressing transnational crime and
corruption and strengthening governance frameworks
and criminal justice systems.

A key element in that effort is the Bali Process. The
Bali Declaration recognizes the critical need to engage
with the private sector, including by promoting and
implementing humane, non-abusive labour practices
throughout supply chains. Later this year, the Bali
Process Business Forum will bring together Ministers
and private-sector leaders from the 45 member countries
of the Bali process to discuss policy approaches to
tackling human trafficking and slavery and to share
experiences on best practices.

We need a global anti-trafficking strategy and better
coordination of data and funding. We must encourage
and support United Nations efforts to strengthen
coordination and develop a more strategic and
coherent international response. Alliance 8.7 provides
an important platform to advance our international
cooperation and programmes. It will assist all States
Members of the United Nations to eradicate forced
labour, modern slavery, human trafficking and all
forms of child labour. Australia and Canada are proud
to be part of the Group of Friends of Decent Work for
Sustainable Development, and I encourage all Members
to join.

We should also ensure that the 2017 review of the
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
makes a practical contribution.

Every country in the world is affected by the blight
of modern slavery. We must be focused, committed and
coordinated in stamping it out.

