Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
others in expressing our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate marking
a decade of our efforts with regard to implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). I also thank the Secretary-
General for providing us with his important report
(S/2010/498). The participation of several ministers,
high-level officials and distinguished speakers in this
debate clearly reflects the global commitment to
enhancing the role of women at all stages of peace and
conflict resolution processes.

Our debate comes at a timely juncture, with the
recent establishment of UN Women and appointment of
Ms. Bachelet, who joined us today for the debate, as its
first Under-Secretary-General.

Let me reaffirm Indonesia's support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. That resolution was the
culmination of the growing realization of women's
diverse roles in and contribution to conflict resolution
and building peace. It has been an important
complement to the range of international frameworks
on women, including the Beijing Platform for Action,
which addresses, among other things, women and
armed conflict as one of the areas for action.

The resolution has galvanized efforts by Member
States, the United Nations system and civil society
organizations, thus making it one of the most translated
resolutions of the Security Council.

For the ten years following its adoption, the
Security Council's attention towards women's
participation in peace processes and the elimination of
sexual violence in armed conflict has been unwavering.
The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009)
and 1889 (2009), as well as the appointment of Margot
Wallstrom as the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict testify to the Council's deep
commitment.

Furthermore, Indonesia also takes note of the
activities by the United Nations system to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) through the System-wide
Action Plan, which covers the five pillars of the
resolution. Commendable efforts have been made
through the Plan. However, as reflected in the
Secretary-General's report, despite the increasing
number and intensity of activities to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), progress has remained slow,
fragmented and without clear direction, lacking time-
bound goals and targets. The recently established UN
Women will, we hope, therefore contribute to
enhancing coherence and coordination in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Noting that the resolution has galvanized
important efforts at all levels on women, peace and
security, it is important for the Council to continue
making efforts to ensure its effective implementation.
The international community has every interest in
ensuring the full involvement of women in all stages of
the peace process, peacekeeping and peacebuilding:
women as peacemakers, women as peacekeepers and
women as peacebuilders.

In an era when opportunities and knowledge
abound, we find that women's potential contributions
to conflict resolution processes have not been
adequately harnessed. That represents an enormous
deficit in our common efforts. Excluding or omitting
women's participation in conflict resolution processes
weakens efforts to increase representation by major
stakeholders to achieve sustainable peace based on
inclusion of all perspectives. Thus, widening the
opportunity for women's participation at various stages
of peace and conflict resolution processes demands our
continued full support.

The Council's adoption of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/22) today marks an important
step to enhance the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Looking forward, the Council has recognized
the need to implement resolution 1325 (2000) more
consistently. One of the areas underlined is the need for
timely and systematic reporting on women and peace
and security issues.

The Secretary-General's recommendation to track
the implementation of the resolution based on a set of
indicators was discussed in a previous debate in April
(see S/PV.6302). We take note of the consultations held
by the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women with all geographic groups to
develop the indicators. Bearing in mind the Secretary-
General's notation that the indicators will be
operational in two years, we encourage continued
consultations with all Member States on their practical
application. It is important to take into account the
specificities of relevant countries. In order to ensure
the United Nations readiness to apply the indicators in
the future, efforts must be made to develop working
methods within the United Nations system.

To conclude, let me reiterate that the
responsibility to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions with a view to enhancing women's
participation in peace processes, including the
protection of women, rests primarily with the
respective Governments. Therefore, achieving
sustainable progress in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) requires national ownership,
along with adequate capacity and resources. It is also
imperative to take into consideration the specific needs
and conditions of each respective country. For this
reason, the support of the international community,
including civil society networks, continues to be
important to achieving this noble goal.

