Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United States for having organized
this open debate on a very important protection gap,
that related to sexual and gender-based violence in
armed conflict and in post-conflict situations.

In situations of armed conflict and periods of
instability, armed groups often use violence against
civilians, especially women, as a deliberate tactic of
war. In Afghanistan, the devastating impacts of three
decades of armed conflict have particularly affected the
most vulnerable part of our population, namely women
and children. During this period, the basic rights of
Afghan women have been undermined, even denied,
due to the vicious cycles of violence which allowed
groups with power to act with impunity in the face of
women's vulnerability. Under the Taliban regime,
Afghanistan was a graveyard for human and women's
rights, where barbaric atrocities against women
constantly occurred. No one can forget the images of
innocent Afghan women being slaughtered in Kabul's
stadium and the images of the inhuman Taliban
bludgeoning women in the street for so-called
unvirtuous behaviour. Today the results of widespread
violence during years of conflict are still affecting the
private and public spheres of women's lives in
Afghanistan.

In several armed conflict situations, acts of sexual
and gender-based violence have been used to humiliate
and forcibly relocate civilian members of a community
or ethnic group. In Afghanistan, sexual violence was
not a predominant method employed by armed groups
in conflict, due to the strong cultural bounds within our
society. However, sexual violence was used by some
individuals and groups as an instrument of war.

Afghanistan recognizes that sexual and gender-
based violence is a threat to international peace and
security and condemns all sexual and gender-based
violence committed against civilians in conflict-
affected situations. We would also like to acknowledge
that, in countries in armed conflict as well as in post-
conflict countries, violence against women has
multiple dimensions that extend beyond a sexual
nature.

It has been eight years since the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1325 (2000) and about
seven years since the fall of the barbaric regime of the
Taliban and the beginning of the peace process,
democratization and reconstruction efforts in
Afghanistan. Our vision is a peaceful and progressive
nation where women and men enjoy security, equal
rights and opportunities in all spheres of life.

The Government of Afghanistan has made
considerable achievements in protecting women from
violence and in ensuring a secure environment where
their rights are protected and their participation in
decision-making bodies and in the peacebuilding
process is guaranteed. The fact that 28 per cent of the
seats in the Afghan Assembly are held by women is
testament to this claim. This places Afghanistan as the
twentieth-ranked country in the world in terms of
female representation in parliament.

Afghanistan has undertaken several initiatives in
addressing violence against women, as embodied in its
constitution, the Millennium Development Goals, the
Afghanistan Compact, the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy that was recently launched in
Paris, and international treaties. The Afghan Ministry
of Women's Affairs is leading our efforts in achieving
this goal and chairs the ministerial task force created in
2005 to eliminate all forms of violence against women.

We would like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to all relevant organizations, including
United Nations agencies, in particular the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, as well as to
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
for assisting us in advancing the status of Afghan
women.

Progress in the process that involves the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants and the disbanding of illegal armed
groups has contributed to minimizing violence against
civilians, particularly women and children. However,
the successful completion of this process will help to
create an environment where women will be
empowered to exercise their rights.

The Afghan Government recognizes that security
sector reform is crucial to strengthening the rule of law,
to ensuring the protection of women's rights, to
improving law enforcement bodies and to ending the
culture of impunity.

But at the same time, we would like to underscore
the need for women to participate in the security sector
reform process. In this regard, initial steps have been
taken by the Ministry of the Interior to increase the
recruitment of female law enforcement officers and to
provide gender sensitivity training in the police
academy. Police family response units are staffed by
women who are trained to deal with domestic violence
and to respond to female victims of crime.

The escalation of violence and insecurity in some
parts of the country as a result of the terrorist activities
carried out by the Taliban and Al-Qaida hinders the
implementation of the rule of law and consequently
makes women vulnerable to all forms of violence.
Various methods of violence against women are used
by the Taliban and Al-Qaida to intimidate, terrorize and
force Afghan women to retreat from public activities
and limit their access to health care, education, justice
and economic and social endeavours, particularly in
the southern and eastern parts of Afghanistan. The
terrorist campaign of the Taliban and Al-Qaida has
particularly affected girls' school enrolment and
attendance. Schools are burned, and female teachers
and students are attacked and threatened.

The legacy of the long conflict, including access
to weapons, difficulty in stabilization efforts and
rampant poverty, is reflected in some parts of the
country in self-immolation, forced marriage, domestic
and other forms of violence. In order to be successful
in our efforts to eliminate these practices, we request
the international community to continue its assistance
so that we may strengthen our national capacity in
ensuring a secure environment, improving economic
and social conditions and implementing human rights
and the rule of law in Afghanistan.

The protection of civilians, including women, is
highlighted as an inherent part of the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force mission
operating in Afghanistan. We would like to emphasize
on the need to integrate specific strategies for the better
protection of women from all forms of violence,
including sexual violence. We also encourage
peacekeeping forces to receive predeployment gender
sensitivity training.

Sustainable peace in Afghanistan cannot be
achieved without the participation of half of its
population, namely Afghan women. Afghanistan
recognizes the importance of the positive contribution
of women to conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and the promotion of peace and security. As Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon justly stated this morning, the

08-3908]
most effective way to combat violence against women
is to make women messengers of peace instead of
victims of violence. That reflects our vision for Afghan
women.

