Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to commend the Spanish presidency
of the Security Council and to welcome the President of
the Spanish Government to this important open debate
on women and peace and security. I would also like to
commend the quality of the report (S/2015/7l6) of the
Secretary-General, as well as to welcome the briefings
by the Executive Director of UN-Women and the others
who spoke after her. As a historic milestone, resolution
1325 (2000) will contribute to bridging a gap when it
comes to the search for lasting peace, reconciliation
among people and ensuring justice.

As an integral component of crimes against
humanity, genocide and war crimes, sexual and gender-
based violence breaches the social contract that binds
civilians to security forces, undermines the foundations
of peace and destroys development efforts. Moreover,
discrimination against women in peace efforts, in
addition to further aggravating such injustice, runs the
risk of sowing the future seeds of resurgent conflict.

The implementation of this programmatic
and operational framework, strengthened by other
resolutions, led the Council to take into account the issue
of women and peace and security in 7 of 13 agreements
concluded in 2013 and in 14 of 20 resolutions creating
or extending United Nations peacekeeping mandates.
I commend the participation of women in all United
Nations-led peace mediation efforts in 2013.

However, despite those highly encouraging efforts,
women and girls continue to be subject to the lawlessness
of warlords. That is why we believe it important, as we
pursue our efforts under resolution 1325 (2000) and
other substantive texts, to adopt an integrated, holistic
approach that prioritizes the political, development
and human rights perspectives in order to better keep
the peace, break the cycle of impunity and ensure
reconciliation and the social reintegration of victims
and their former executioners.

That brings me to the question of the
empowerment a particularly economic - of women
during and after conflict as they take part in the kind of
recovery efforts that are so valued by the Peacebuilding
Commission. In that respect, I underscore the
meaningful contributions that regional and
subregional organizations can and must provide to the
implementation of that important agenda. In that light,
I reaffirm that Senegal, as the seventh-largest troop-
contributing country and candidate for non-permanent
membership of the Council for 2016-2017, maintains
a priority focus on the women and peace and security
agenda.

That priority is already manifested by the 60
Senegalese women participating in United Nations
missions and the Senegalese contribution towards
making the idea of a situation room a familiar
concept. Senegal's faith in the leadership of women
was highlighted by President Macky Sall's choice
to co-sponsor the launching of the United Nations
campaign against sexual violence.

In conclusion, I wish to highly commend the
adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which Senegal
co-sponsored.

