Mr. Guehenno: I am very pleased to be able to
brief the Council once again at this year's open debate
on resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace and
security.

In 2007, we have seen a number of significant
advances in the contribution of women to the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding. Some of those advances have taken
place in countries in which peacekeeping operations
are deployed and also represent initiatives in how the
United Nations goes about peacekeeping. For instance,
in Haiti's municipal election this year, 25 women were
elected mayors, as compared to six in 2000. That was
due, in part, to the collaboration of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti with national partners to
provide coaching for female candidates. In turn,
January saw the deployment, for the first time, of an
all-female police contingent to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, when an Indian formed police
unit took up duties with the United Nations Mission in
Liberia.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) also continued to take steps to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) in the past year. Last
November, DPKO adopted a policy directive on gender
equality in United Nations peacekeeping operations
that obliges all uniformed and civilian staff to ensure
the equal participation of women, men, girls and boys
in all peacekeeping activities. DPKO and the
Department of Field Support are now translating that
policy into action, including through the development
3
of initiatives such as guidelines for political affairs
officers on how to mainstream gender in their work.

Both Departments at Headquarters continue to
oversee the joint DPKO-Department of Field Support
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) through the interdepartmental task force on
gender. Such task forces are also being replicated in the
missions, with the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) having most recently re-established
its gender task force in August, in order to further
strengthen its gender mainstreaming across all sections
of the mission.

The gender team at Headquarters has been
bolstered through the recent realignment process. That
included the upgrading of the post of gender adviser to
the P-5 level, as a reflection of the skills and
experience required to lead the team's work in
backstopping and providing policy advice to the field
and all divisions and offices within DPKO and the
Department of Field Support.

Similarly, as I have mentioned to the Council
before, we are committed to increasing the number of
women serving in the field in civilian leadership
positions and in operational military and police roles.
The Secretariat has therefore taken concrete steps to
strengthen its capacity to identify suitably qualified
senior women, including through the establishment
within the Department of Field Support of a small
dedicated capacity focused on senior leadership
appointments.

Since February, the number of women serving in
senior civilian positions has increased by almost 40 per
cent. As the Council is aware, last week,
Ms. Margrethe Lszsj was appointed as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to lead the
United Nations Mission in Liberia, along with
Ms. Henrietta Mensah-Bonsu as Deputy for Operations
and the Rule of Law. Female deputy heads of Mission
were also recently appointed in the Sudan - where,
Ms. Ameerah Haq was named the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Humanitarian
Coordinator and Resident Coordinator - and in
Burundi, where Ms. Bintou Keita was appointed as the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General. I
am particularly pleased at the appointment of
Commissioner Agatha Lele as Senior Police Adviser in
Burundi. I should also like to draw the attention of the
Council to the composition of the new standing police
capacity, nearly 25 per cent of which is female.

I recognize that we still have far to go in
expanding the role and contribution of women in our
operations. Nonetheless, the momentum towards
achieving greater balance is building. I again urge
Member States to work closely with us in putting
forward suitably qualified female candidates ready and
willing to serve in peacekeeping operations.

Most importantly, in the context of this debate, I
would like to reiterate our ongoing implementation of
zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse that
may have been committed by United Nations
personnel. We have continued to take significant
measures and have deployed additional resources to
address sexual exploitation. There are currently several
related policies before the General Assembly for
consideration, including one on assistance to the
victims of alleged abuses by United Nations personnel.
In addition, earlier this year, DPKO adopted a welfare
and recreation policy. It has also provided for guidance
on the design and implementation of welfare and
recreation measures and facilities to improve the
wellness and the working and living conditions of all
United Nations peacekeeping personnel.

The theme of today's debate is "Towards coherent
and effective implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2005)". In the past seven years our
strategy has been to focus on the implementation of the
individual parts of the resolution. To that end, we have
indeed made progress in the implementation of our
responsibilities. I would suggest, however, that it is
time to review that fragmented and disparate approach
to the implementation of the resolution. We know that
resolving conflict requires a multifaceted and
interlinked approach. If we are therefore to empower
women in that process, our efforts will also have to be
integrated. Coherent and effective implementation first
requires that we more fully understand the relationship
between protection and empowerment in all their
aspects, as set forth in the resolution, and that we
understand how that affects the role and contribution of
women to the maintenance of peace and security.
Strategies must thereafter be developed that
incorporate a range of mutually reinforcing and
coordinated activities aimed at the full implementation
of the resolution.
07-55817

If we look, for example, at the range of

interventions necessary to address rape and other forms

of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict

situations, it becomes clear how pressing is the need
for such a concerted and integrated approach.

Though DPKO is committed to combating sexual
violence, we can start to truly address it in the field
only with the help of the national authorities, the
United Nations country team, and bilateral and
non-governmental organization partners. The need for
a truly United Nations-wide approach to that
underscores the need for a strengthened United Nations
gender architecture, as recommended by the High-level
Panel on System-wide Coherence.

While rape is used as a weapon of war in
situations such as those in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Darfur, addressing that war crime
requires going beyond political compromise and
power- and resource-sharing agreements. Instead,
combating rape and other forms of sexual violence
calls for concerted, robust and ongoing action on the
part of national actors and the international community
alike at every level of engagement.

(spoke in French)

Sitting here today, I wish to stress that a first
element of an effective strategy is the importance that
the Security Council attaches to both understanding the
impact of sexual violence on the maintenance of peace
and security and to ensuring that the mandates and
resources given to peacekeeping missions take into
account the tragic situations faced by women and girls
who suffer in conflicts and that they provide for the
protection of civilians, including the special needs of
women and girls.

The second element of an effective strategy is the
political leadership of the United Nations, through the
special representatives of the Secretary-General on the
ground, in eliminating sexual violence. I have no doubt
that, with the backing of the Council and interested
Member States, special representatives can play a very
important and decisive role in their advocacy, dialogue
and good offices with the host countries and
Governments concerned.

Thirdly, our missions can play a key role in
providing preventive physical protection, for example,
through their daily patrols. Such actions should be
coordinated with preventive and victim's assistance

programmes, including those carried out by other
mission components, such as the United Nations
country team, national actors and non-governmental
organizations. In some locations in which we are
deployed, such modest patrols can make the difference
between life and death and act as a deterrent to rape,
abductions and other forms of torture. At the same
time, I know that we should not overstate the
protection we can provide and that, even where each
person protected represents a victory over the horror of
sexual violence, we must be aware that the protection
we offer will always be limited. When I think of our
future deployment to Darfur, I am well aware that the
reinforcement of troops there and the deployment of
Blue Berets alone will not bring an end to sexual
violence and the terrible crime of rape, given the extent
of the territory to be covered, and that we will have to
take action on all fronts in the fight against sexual
violence and abuse. We cannot rely exclusively on
military protection.

The fourth element of an effective and
comprehensive strategy is the role our missions can
play in facilitating and assisting national efforts to
reform institutionally discriminatory structures,
including rule of law institutions and the legal
framework, in States where we have a presence. Such
efforts appropriately reflect the impact of such
structures in perpetuating sexual violence by ignoring
them. In addition, those efforts underscore the fact that
a coherent strategy to combat sexual violence must
incorporate a thoughtful understanding of sexual
violence in conflicts. If there is no such understanding
of the problem, there can be no effective campaign
against it. It is therefore a question of addressing the
issue both in the short term and in the long term if we
truly seek to resolve it.

As part of our efforts to address discrimination
against women, we must clearly stress the assignment
of women to senior civilian positions, as I noted, as
well as to military and policing posts, so as to
encourage local women in the countries where we are
deployed to assume lead roles and to promote the
development of a non-discriminatory system once the
mission leaves. One example I would note is that the
Liberian National Police received three times the usual
number of female applicants in the month following
the deployment of the Indian all-female police
contingent to which I referred earlier.
More women in a police force must be
accompanied by a strategy to improve policing as a
service equally accessible to women. That in turn
requires laws that incorporate women's rights and a
judicial system accessible to victims of sexual
violence. While it is the national Government's
responsibility to ensure such accessibility, our missions
have a role to play - as defined in their mandates -
in monitoring remaining obstacles to women's access
and in developing capacity-building programmes for
human rights and judicial institutions.

(spoke in English)

Combating sexual violence requires a multiplicity
of actors carrying out a multiplicity of actions in
coordination and in coherence. I would urge that this
approach be applied across the range of actions
envisaged in resolution 1325 (2000). If we are to be
effective in implementing that resolution, it is crucial
that we share a common understanding of the factors
that affect the role of women and their capacity to
contribute to the maintenance of peace and security.
We must also commit to identifying ways in which our
different roles at the national and international levels
can link together in an integrated and effective manner.
Only together can we truly ensure the protection and
empowerment of women in conflict.

