Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The debate you
have convened, Sir, on the issue of women, peace and
security is a timely one and we thank you very much
for your initiative.

We believe that there are two main areas of this
broad topic, which warrant equal attention, and they
are the issues of protection and participation, as set out
in resolution 1325 (2000).

On the protection side, women and girls continue
to be prime targets due to their perceived role as
bearers of cultural identity and their special
vulnerability. The recent past has certainly brought
about some landmark developments in the area of
protection, most prominent among them the
recognition of rape and other forms of sexual violence
as a crime under international law. The ad hoc tribunals
established by the Security Council have done
groundbreaking work in that area, and the relevant
provisions of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court were drafted in a manner that allows
the Court to bring to justice perpetrators of gender-
specific crimes in times of armed conflict.

Protection under the law, and in particular under
international law, is of paramount importance and can
have a preventive effect, but it must of course be
complemented by practical and operational measures,
in particular those undertaken by United Nations
operations and presences in the field. In that context,
we welcome in particular the appointment of an interim
gender adviser in the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations. We hope that the permanent position for a
senior gender adviser can be filled in the near future.
We very much welcome the presence of the Senior
Gender Adviser to the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo at
today's meeting. We would like to thank her for her
contribution to this debate.

Still on the issue of protection, the study on
women, peace and security submitted last year also
makes it clear that the effects of armed conflict on
women are particularly grave where a culture of
violence and discrimination against women and girls
exists even prior to an armed conflict. There is
therefore a continued need for close cooperation
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, which is active in the elimination of
discrimination and domestic violence against women.

The attention given to the participation of women
must be at least as strong as that given to the need for
their protection. There seems to be a continued lack of
awareness of the fact that women can, and often do,
play an active role in connection with armed conflicts,
as participants in hostilities but also as crucial players
in peace processes, in particular when they are
informal, and in post-conflict peace-building situations.

The United Nations and its operations on the
ground are perfectly placed to utilize that largely
untapped resource. We continue to believe very
strongly that the appointment of women as special
representatives and envoys can play a catalytic role in
increasing the involvement of women in peace
processes, especially when those processes reach more
formal stages. Such appointments might also have a
positive impact on the level of reporting on gender-
related issues to the Security Council, which is still
unsatisfactory. Again, since the Council last met on this
topic, progress on women's representation in such
leadership positions has been disappointing.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a groundbreaking
text that was followed up by an excellent study and
report to the Council last year. The 21 points identified
for action by the Secretary-General constitute a very
concrete basis for action. Their implementation will go
a very long way to address and, in fact, alter the current
situation of women in armed conflict. We very much
commend the work done by the Inter-Agency Task
Force on Women, Peace and Security. We would also
like to make particular mention of the implementation
work carried out by the Department for Disarmament
Affairs and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

Nevertheless, there is obviously a long way to go,
and we wonder if all the tools are actually in place to
ensure full implementation. The action plan for
implementation developed by the Task Force requires a
significant coordination effort, and it is not clear to us
whether the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women is sufficiently
equipped to fully play that crucial role. It also seems to
us that the Council itself has not been consistent
enough in incorporating resolution 1325 (2000), or
aspects thereof, in its relevant resolutions. Enhanced
coordination along the lines of the proposal made
earlier in this meeting by Chile would be an excellent
measure to improve the Council's efficiency in that
respect.

