Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): I am
pleased to take the floor today on behalf of the Human
Security Network, a cross-regional group of 14
countries - Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, the Netherlands,
Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand and, as an
observer, South Africa. On behalf of those countries, I
would like to express our appreciation to Romania for
having convened this open debate on women, peace
and security - a priority issue for the Network - and
to thank the panellists today, who have spoken with
such conviction.

At the 2005 world summit, the leaders reaffirmed
their determination to fully and effectively implement
resolution 1325 (2000). As we mark the fifth
anniversary of that resolution and look to other
important commitments, such as the protection of
civilians and children in armed conflict, as well as to
important milestones such as the 10-year review of the
1995 Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, it is
clear that we have the necessary tools for strong and
concerted action in all situations of conflict and post-
conflict reconstruction.

The creation of the Peacebuilding Commission is
essential if we are to preserve and build on
international peace and security. In this year's report to
the Security Council on women, peace and security, the
Secretary-General urged Member States to take
concerted action to integrate a gender perspective into
the Commission's mandate and work. We have a
golden opportunity to ensure that, from the outset, the
Commission's work incorporates the knowledge and
the lessons learned from the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Effective and sustainable
peace, justice and security will remain a distant goals if
we do not view them from a gender perspective. The
Human Security Network welcomes the letter sent to
the Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly by the women foreign ministers on this
issue. The countries of the Human Security Network
will work with other Member States to ensure that the
Peacebuilding Commission fully integrates such an
approach in its structure, mandate and practice.

In this spirit I thank the Secretary-General for his
report, which outlines the United Nations system-wide
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The Network applauds the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations system in
this area and warmly welcomes the action plan, which
it commits to supporting in full.

In this context, the Human Security Network
strongly supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation to appoint a high-level focal point or
focal points to monitor the progress of implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) within the United Nations
system. In addition, and as at last year's open debate
on women, peace and security, the members of the
Network call on the Security Council to seriously
consider establishing a mechanism to monitor its own
actions to integrate resolution 1325 (2000) and other
resolutions into its daily work, possibly through a focal
point or expert-level working group.

Furthermore, as States Members of the United
Nations, we should all consider developing action
plans and coordinated strategies at the national level
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) - a
process that Canada has already begun.

(spoke in English)

Among the gaps identified by the Secretary-
General in his report are the lack of systematic
incorporation of gender perspectives in peace
agreements and the lack of enhanced women's
participation in formal peace processes. Those
elements were the focus of the expert group meeting
hosted by Canada in preparation for last year's session
of the Commission on the Status of Women, which
developed a framework for model provisions on peace
agreements as a means of promoting gender equality
and ensuring women's participation in peace processes.
The Network welcomes that outcome.

Women are highly active and effective in
informal peace processes. The challenge lies in their
participation in formal processes where peace
agreements are negotiated. There, women have been
frozen out of the peace process and given no room at
the peace table. In addition, a further challenge is that
formal peace processes rarely take gender perspectives
into account.

The Human Security Network is committed to
taking concrete steps to enhance the role of women and
to integrate gender equality in peace processes more
effectively, thereby strengthening the legitimacy of
decision-making processes and, by so doing, assisting
in laying the groundwork for a meaningful and
sustainable peace for all. The Network maintains that
the involvement of all of society at every step,
including women and women's groups, is crucial to the
enduring success of the entire peace process, from
negotiation to implementation of a peace agreement. In
order to achieve that, capacity-building in the area of
gender equality, women's rights and the
gender-differentiated experiences of security is
required for all actors, both men and women, as is an
active search for women leaders.

Members of the Network urge the Security
Council to systematically incorporate gender
considerations in all aspects of mission planning and
execution, particularly from the outset. This would
result in directing peace support action towards
security that is as real for women as it is for men.
Concretely, that could mean, for example, that
women's enhanced role in transitional justice
mechanisms would more likely bring to immediate
attention impunity for acts of violence and seek robust
measures to address it.

The Human Security Network would like to
reiterate the importance of achieving gender justice and
welcomes the conferences held recently on this issue in
New York and in Stockholm.

As we noted last year during the open debate on
this topic, sexual and gender-based violence remains
alarmingly pervasive in conflict-affected areas. The
referral by the Security Council of the situation in
Darfur to the International Criminal Court, and the
Court's investigation into the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Uganda, are
very positive steps, yet they are testimony to the
widespread allegations of horrific abuses against
women and children in conflict situations.

In this year's report, the Secretary-General
highlights once again that further action is required to
prevent, document and report on gender-based
violence, as we have not yet done enough. The
Network reiterates that it is the role of the Security
Council to work together with countries and
Governments, as well as with the International
Criminal Court, to prosecute such crimes and to
eliminate the impunity with which they are perpetrated.

In that regard, the Network welcomes the recent
adoption by world leaders at the world summit of the
principle of the responsibility to protect. We were
particularly pleased that the threshold for action that
was endorsed is an inclusive one, in that it holds not
only genocide and war crimes but also crimes against
humanity as a trigger for action. The definition of
crimes against humanity includes all of the most
egregious examples of gender-based violence - the
horrific results of which we have seen in too many
conflict areas. We must continue to work to ensure that
the international community has both the capacity and
the political will to operationalize the responsibility to
protect. In particular, a rigorous monitoring and
reporting mechanism for gender-based violence will be
essential to ensure that States shoulder their
responsibility not only to prevent such violence but
also to protect their own citizens from such crimes.

In conclusion, the Human Security Network
believes that it is the role of the Security Council to
ensure that planning and implementation of all
multidimensional peace support operations fully
integrate a gender analysis and aim to strengthen the
many and varied roles of women in peace processes,
whether of a political, humanitarian, development,
policing or civilian nature. Members of the Network
thus strongly urge the Council to give full
consideration to the report of the Secretary-General
containing the United Nations system-wide action plan
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and
to implementing the recommendations therein.

We look forward to future discussions in this
forum during which we can hear reports of how
resolution 1325 (2000) has been implemented in
specific conflict situations and how it has made a
difference in the lives of women.

