Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this
open debate of the Security Council. I also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN-Women, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and Ms. Bineta Diop,
President and Founder of Femmes Africa Solidarite.

Italy aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and wishes to
make some additional remarks in its national capacity.

We welcome the debate's focus on the contribution
of women's organizations to preventing and settling
armed conflicts and to fostering peacebuilding.
Throughout the world, women's rights advocates are
fighting, and at times risking their lives, to ensure that
women and girls are not excluded from decision-making
about the political future of their country. They are
fighting to ensure that their voices are heard when
peace agreements are brokered and that they receive
justice when the dignity of women is violated. We are
here not only to pay tribute to their work and courage,
but also to pledge concrete action to work with them
towards together realizing the women and peace and
security agenda.

Italy recalls the Secretary-General's appeal to
involve women's organizations from the early stages
of conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts. That
should become standard practice. Women leaders also
have an important role to play in transitions, including
in the drawdown of United Nations and international
missions, when the previous gains in gender equality
can be at risk. As a country engaged in peace missions
in the world, Italy is committed to ensuring that respect
for women's rights is strengthened during such critical
phases.

We cannot promote the participation of women and
girls unless we ensure their full protection. The Security
Council must be vigilant in that regard. The targeting
of women human rights defenders is a matter of grave
concern. The Secretary-General's report (S/2012/732)
describes the use of sexual violence as a conflict tactic
across a wide range of scenarios. Greater efforts are
needed to increase the prosecution of such crimes at both
the national and the international levels and to address
the needs of survivors. In that regard, we welcome the
appointment of the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, and we stand ready to support her
fully in that endeavour.

Italy welcomes the presidential statement adopted
by the Security Council on 31 October (S/PRST/2012/23)
and the reaffirmation of its commitment to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and the follow-up resolutions.
We strongly urge the Council to live up to that
commitment, in particular by ensuring that all decisions
on country-specific and thematic issues, as well as
the authorization or renewal of mission mandates, are
reviewed in terms of their impact on women and girls.
We welcome the Secretary-General's commitment to
increasing women's participation and representation in
conflict resolution and prevention efforts. Women are
formidable negotiators, mediators and peacebuilders.
They are a resource that we cannot afford to leave
untapped.

Italy is a long-standing supporter of the women
and peace and security agenda. In December 2010,
we adopted a three-year action plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). Next year, we will review
the plan in order to assess its progress. Action plans
and strategies are indeed a critical tool to advance
implementation and to enhance accountability at both
the national and the regional levels. We also welcome
the increasing work done by regional organizations,
such as NATO, to mainstream women and peace and
security in their action.

Support to Governments and civil society through
development cooperation programmes has been another
key component of Italy's efforts to advance the agenda,
particularly in Afghanistan, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

I wish to conclude by echoing the Secretary-
General. Effective conflict prevention is inevitably
embedded in long-term investments in women's and
girls' empowerment and in support for women's efforts
to build peace. If we are serious about peace, we must
also be serious about the rights of women and girls.
The better we understand that equation, the more
successful we will be in our efforts to ensure peace and
development throughout the world.

