Mr. Gahutu (Burundi): Mr. President, my
delegation would like to thank you for organizing this
debate on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). I would also like to commend
the Secretary-General for his report on the
implementation of the resolution (S/2010/498).

Throughout the many conflicts that Burundi has
gone through, the people of Burundi have understood
that the search for a viable and promising peace cannot
be carried out by men alone but should also include
women. Moreover, it has been well known for a long
time in my country that women are the pillar of the
family and therefore of society. When society is shaken
by an armed conflict, its grisly effects inevitably have
repercussions for women and their children.

Therefore, the women of Burundi have
understood that they should play a role in the search
for peace. Thus, since the crisis broke out in Burundi in
1993, women's organizations have become involved in
45
bringing together different groups of the population
who were sharply divided along political and ethnic
lines in collaboration with local administrations.

During the same period, two decisive events were
under way at the regional and international levels. The
first was the Arusha negotiations, which gave the
women of Burundi a seat at the negotiating table. The
second was the period of the evolution of resolution
1325 (2000), here at the United Nations. Some
observers, moreover, believe that the peace negotiation
process in Burundi, which formally began in 1998, two
years before the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
inspired many actors who, drawing on the lessons
learned in Arusha, certainly helped to improve the text
of the resolution. Consequently, the peace agreement
signed by the protagonists in the Burundi conflict in
August 2000 already contained a gender-specific
dimension in some of its provisions and protocols.

On 31 October 2000, when resolution 1325 (2000)
was solemnly adopted by the Security Council,
Burundi was in a good position to implement it, given
not only the experience that Burundian actors had
recently acquired in Arusha and the backing of
international organizations in the support of women of
Burundi during the peace process, but also the
challenges still to be tackled, in particular, agreeing on
a ceasefire with the armed movements and the
implementation of the gender-specific dimensions of
the agreement.

Since 2005, Burundi has sought to give women
an important role in managing public affairs. The
unremitting struggle of the women of Burundi, together
with the determination of the Government, made it
possible to achieve the results that the whole world can
see today in terms of the representation of women in
decision-making bodies, both at the executive and the
legislative levels. Indeed, after the elections this year,
the women of Burundi have enjoyed a significant
presence within decision-making bodies. They hold 32
and 44 per cent of the seats in the National Assembly
and the Senate, respectively, and 42 per cent of the
ministerial portfolios in the Government, including in
the Ministry of Finance, Agriculture and Livestock
Farming, Trade, Tourism and Industry, and Justice, and
this is just to cite a few of the posts that have long been
held by men.

In the judicial branch, there is a good level of
representation of women in high offices. Three women
46

in fact preside over the following higher courts: the
Supreme Court, the Constitutional Court and the
Administrative Court. In a society characterized by
male dominance in the highest State offices, those
positions reflect an important change in terms of
gender.

Turning to peacekeeping, it is important to
emphasize that, at this time, the idea of having women
in the police and army is socially accepted, even if
their numbers have not reached those of women in
other institutions. In our policy with regard to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, women have been included and
benefit equally from this policy. Their specific needs
are taken into account, be it through the assistance that
has been granted, in the past, to former male
combatants or through the integration of women into
the national defence forces.

The question that remains crucial in Burundi is
that of customary law and the access of women to
property and inheritance. That issue has become a
social concern that the Government of Burundi must
address in order to align itself with the parliamentary
debate convened in 2004, which resulted in a proposed
draft law on succession, matrimony and rights. With
the significant representation of women in the
Parliament and the Government and with the
determination of all of the actors in Burundi to fight
against social inequality, there is hope that the new law
will be promulgated after consultations among all
actors.

In order to fully achieve the objectives of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), women in
civil society, under the leadership of the Ministry of
National Solidarity, Human Rights and Gender and in
partnership with United Nations agencies, have drawn
up plan of action for resolution 1325 (2000)
comprising eight pillars that outline the steps to take to
make this resolution effective.

The topics promoted through these pillars are
primarily participation, conflict prevention, protection
against violence against women and children and
community recovery. In terms of the latter, projects
have already been carried out through the
peacebuilding programme in the western part of our
country, but, given the enormous needs in post-conflict
reconstruction, gender-based projects need to be
encouraged and established throughout the country.
10-60385
In order to ensure that the participation of women
becomes more active and grows, there are also the
issues of strengthening their capacities and establishing
a fund to ensure their continuous participation in
various activities, so that they can take charge of their
own destiny.

In this connection, during the Global Open Day
for Women and Peace on 11 June 2010, the women of
Burundi firmly recommended to the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for Burundi
the establishment of a basket fund that would facilitate
the economic recovery of women in the context of
post-conflict reconstruction.

In that respect, we welcome the creation of the
new entity, UN Women, and given the enormous task
facing its Director, Under-Secretary-General Bachelet,
we hope that she will receive the sustained support of
Member States, so that the new entity can respond to
the expectations of women, who are only asking for
access to resources. Once this has been achieved, the
empowerment of women will have become a reality.

