Mr. Prosor (Israel): Mr. President, let me begin
by thanking you personally for your stewardship of the
Security Council this month and for holding this very
important debate.

Today's discussion is about our collective
responsibility to give voice to the voiceless. An
increasing number of conflicts around the world are
made even more horrific by the use of sexual violence.
These are often the most disturbing and the most
hidden elements of conflict. Yet, the number of victims
is staggering, and it continues to grow every day. Each
one of these people has a name and has a family.

The victims are women like Honorata, a young
mother from the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who was held for nearly a year by armed
militias and raped daily in captivity. After Honorata
escaped, the stigma of her rape caused her family to
reject her, leaving her alone and impoverished.
The victims are women like Layla, a teenager
from Iran who was detained for two months during the

country's protests in 2009. In a report last year on the
PBS television channel, Layla described her treatment
by the Iranian authorities. She said, "When they were
raping and torturing me, and putting out cigarettes on
my body, nobody knew... Death was a desire for me. I
wanted to die".

Testimonies like Layla's remind us that the
systematic use of sexual violence is often the calling
card of the most brutal regimes and militias in the
world. State-sponsored rape has served as a primary
tool of dictators from Al-Qadhafi in Libya, Al-Assad
in Syria to the ayatollahs of Iran. Armed groups in
Africa - from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to Somalia - are using sexual violence to spread
terror, instil fear and shatter lives. These tyrants, those
warlords and criminals know that they leave scars not
just on individual victims, but on families and
communities.

Major General Patrick Cammaert, the former
Commander of United Nations peacekeeping forces in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo said:

"Rape is an extremely cheap weapon, but
has vast and far-reaching effects. With the single
weapon of rape, soldiers and militants can disrupt
and destroy the fabric of society. Rape sows fear;
it spreads sexually transmitted disease. It
excludes women from participation in civic life."

In the year since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1960 (2010), the instances of sexual
violence have only increased. We must act with
common purpose in the face of these atrocities. We
must have zero tolerance for the use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war. Israel was a proud to sponsor of
resolution 1960 (2010) and the previous resolutions on
women and peace and security. It is time for the
international community to breathe life into the words
contained in these resolutions with concrete actions on
the ground.

The Secretary-General's report (S/20l2/33) offers
clear guidance on important steps that the international
community must take. For instance, operationally,
those listed in the annex of these reports should face
additional measures from the Security Council
sanctions committees. Israel also strongly supports the
recommendation to include provisions for conflict-
related sexual violence in ceasefire and peace
agreements.

Women have a vital role to play in preventing
sexual violence, which is why we must increase their
roles in peacekeeping forces, negotiation teams and
other relevant bodies. Israel shares the serious concern
of many others about the allegations of sexual violence
by peacekeepers in Haiti over the past year. Such
allegations highlight the important role that women
protection advisers play in such contingents.

Today, I would like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Wallstrom, and her whole
team, sitting here, for the valuable work that they
continue to carry out, such as developing early warning
indicators for sexual violence in conflicts. It is clear
that such work advances the international community's
ability to understand the threat of sexual violence and
to respond more effectively.

Every fall, during our holiest of days, the Jewish
people pray, "May all humankind become one single
family". It is in that spirit that we must pursue this
pressing issue. The imperative to prevent sexual
violence extends beyond politics, religion or
geography. It stands at the core of our common
humanity and the guiding mission of this Council.
Together, we must do our utmost to heal the victims,
protect the innocent and punish those who carry out
this evil. As a family of nations, we must stand
shoulder to shoulder to defend each person from sexual
violence, as if he or she were members of our own
family.

