Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): The discussion of the report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security is very
important to the delegation of Guatemala, first of all,
because our country has benefited from the United
Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
(MINUGUA), which is mentioned by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2004/814) as one of the peace
operations in which three women serve as deputy
special representatives.

Secondly, in accordance with the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to
encourage the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, we take pride in the fact that Guatemala
contributes women to peacekeeping operations. On this
very day, a unit of 70 military police officers is leaving
to join the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), a contingent that includes 5
women.

Regarding the work of MINUGUA, that mission
worked side by side with Guatemala in a negotiating
process that concluded with the signing of the peace
agreements in 1996 and called for profound changes in
our society with an agenda that the Government of
Guatemala has adopted as a minimum. MINUGUA
gave significant support towards improving the
prevailing situation. Now it is incumbent on us, as
Guatemalans, to build a fairer society that will
overcome the exclusion, marginalization and
discrimination that we have suffered, affecting not only
the indigenous peoples but also women in particular.

In September of this year, MINUGUA
inaugurated at United Nations Headquarters an
exhibition of photography entitled, "Guatemala -
Images of Peace", which, apart from demonstrating the
mission's activities, also showed the great challenges
that we must confront and overcome, including poverty
and gender equality, which are two fundamental
elements of resolution 1325 (2000) that we are now
addressing.

Because of our experience and because we are a
country that has emerged from an armed conflict that
impoverished us for 36 years, Guatemala is convinced
of the need to enhance the prevalence of women in the
processes of decision-making and of the valuable
contribution women make to the maintenance of
international peace and security. An educated woman,
free of discrimination and subjugation, is the best
guarantee for achieving sustainable development and
securing peaceful and harmonious social coexistence.
For that reason, we urge the Security Council to
establish and promote strategies and programmes to
prevent gender-based violence. We also support the
establishment of systems to protect victims and
witnesses that bring charges of that kind of crime. In
that regard, the Public Prosecutor's Office in
Guatemala has an office of victim care - a unit which
provides humanitarian assistance and comprehensive
and urgent care in order to minimize the negative
effects of the crime. We agree with the Secretary-
General that the dissemination and exchange of
information are vital in order to raise awareness of the
contents of resolution 1325 (2000).

We congratulate the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) on creating a web site that
offers a centralized database, and the United Nations
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) for the work it
has done in compiling information resources on
gender-related aspects of conflicts and peace, as well
as in managing the inter-agency task force on an
electronic database of gender training materials. We
believe there needs to be better coordination among
Member States, United Nations agencies and civil
society actors, so as to systematically mainstream the
gender perspective and disseminate the content of
resolution 1325 (2000) in terms of conflict prevention,
planning peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
peace-building, which cannot be successful or
complete if women do not fully participate in them.

