Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate
and for giving us the opportunity to participate. At the
outset, we would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/181).

My delegation acknowledges the significant gains
recorded in the past decade towards building political
momentum in the fight against the scourge of sexual
violence in conflict. Undoubtedly, that has contributed
to a more focused, coherent and integrated approach
across the United Nations system in addressing this
complex and persistent challenge.

The recent report of the Secretary-General warrants
serious consideration, given the overwhelming evidence
that sexual violence in situations of armed conflict
and post-conflict remains systemic and widespread
in many parts of the world. We are conscious that the

consequences ofthose egregious crimes are devastating
for affected communities.

While the report of the Secretary-General
strongly underscores the need for a comprehensive,
multi-sectoral and multi-dimensional framework
approach to address the prevention of sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict settings, we concur with
the Secretary-General's observation that national
ownership, leadership and responsibility are key in
the prevention of sexual violence. Ultimately, Member
States bear the primary legal and moral responsibility
for preventing and addressing such crimes.
In the broader framework of prevention, we have
long advocated for the explicit referencing of sexual
violence in conflict in all the relevant country-specific
resolutions, as well as in the authorizations and
renewals of the mandates of peacekeeping and special
political missions.

We recognize the valuable contribution of the
five-point priority agenda of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict as a strategy to address sexual
violence in conflict. However, as highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General, we believe that
priority must be given to fostering national ownership,
leadership and responsibility to ensure sustainability.

My delegation commends the work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict in enhancing the capacity-building of civilian
and militaryjustice systems to address sexual violence.
We believe, however, that significantly more needs to
be done by Member States, the United Nations system
and the relevant entities in supporting national efforts
by States to increase women's participation, leadership
and expertise in the rule of law and transitional justice,
as well as in advancing accountability measures for
serious offences committed against the victims of
sexual violence.

My delegation is of the view that civil society
and women's organizations are important partners in
efforts aimed at preventing and responding to sexual
and gender-based violence and in providing victims
and survivors with information and support, towards
facilitating their access to health services, legal
assistance, basic services and livelihood assistance.

In that regard, Member States, and key United
Nations bodies such as the Peacebuilding Commission,
UN-Women and the United Nations Development
Programme, working with United Nations country
teams and peace missions, have a critical role to play
in supporting and capacitating the development of
civil society and women's organizations at community
and local levels. The value of engaging women from
different communities in identifying early conflict
warning signs, mediating community conflicts, and
leading campaigns to prevent sexual and gender-based
violence is well documented.

In conclusion, every effort must be made to end
impunity by perpetrators of sexual and gender-based
violence in conflict. My delegation therefore affirms
its support for the inclusion of sexual violence in the
definition ofacts prohibited during ceasefires, including
the exclusion of perpetrators of sexual violence from
amnesty provisions.

The Security Council must also include measures
that bring pressure to bear on perpetrators of sexual
violence in conflict, especially on individuals andparties
through the adoption of specific measures, including
specific and time-bound protection commitments by all
the relevant actors to an armed conflict.

While there is value in developing monitoring
mechanisms by the Security Council to ensure the
implementation of the provisions of the relevant
resolutions, greater participation by women in
negotiation and peacemaking processes will allow
for greater inclusivity and incorporation of gender
perspectives reflective of the interests and concerns
of women, thereby contributing to the sustainability of
peace efforts.

