The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Finland, Germany, Ghana, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Norway,
the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Uganda and
the United Arab Emirates in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women; Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Ms. Ines Alberdi, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Sarah Taylor, Coordinator of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/622, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security. I
should also like to draw attention to document
S/2008/655, which contains a letter dated 15 October
2008 from the Permanent Representative of China to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the subject of this
meeting.

I now give the floor to the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Gender Issues and Advancement
of Women, Ms. Rachel Mayanja.


