Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I have
the great honour and privilege to speak on behalf of
the member countries of the Human Security Network,
an intercontinental network comprising Austria, Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Norway, Panama,
Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South Africa as an
observer country, and, of course, my own country, Mali.
The Human Security Network is an informal group of
States that is working to promote the integration of the
human security dimension into policies and programmes
at the national, regional and international levels.

On behalf of the Network's member States, I extend
our warm congratulations to the Peruvian presidency of
the Council on having organized today's open debate on
preventing sexual violence in conflict through capacity-
building, gender equality and access to justice. I also
thank the various briefers.

The Human Security Network welcomes the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/250) and notes
with deep concern the continued use of sexual violence
as strategies of war, terrorism, torture and repression,
as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General. We
are deeply concerned by this sexual violence, whose
victims continued to be targeted in 2017 because oftheir
religious, ethnic or clan affiliation. It is more necessary
than ever for the United Nations to work closely with
Governments in order to prevent and investigate such
crimes and to provide specialized services to victims,
their families and witnesses.

It should also be borne in mind that sexual violence
generally continues even after a conflict has ended. It
is a factor that increases insecurity in affected areas.
Victims ofboth genders are often deprived of protection
and access to justice. And the effects of sexual violence
can extend over many years and generations. Worse,
these crimes are often amnestied. The topic of sexual
violence in conflict or post-conflict situations is
considered taboo, and its victims are usually punished
and stigmatized, while the perpetrators remain at large.
The Human Security Network therefore joins today's
appeals and calls on the Security Council and Member
States to redouble their efforts, particularly in the fight
against impunity.

We must recognize the essential role of international
criminal justice, in particular that of the International
Criminal Court, in deciding cases of sexual violence in
conflict situations. I recall that the Rome Statute - and
this was a great step forward - recognized sexual
violence as a war crime and a crime against humanity.
In this regard, we welcome the 2017 judgment of the
International Criminal Court in the case of Prosecutor
v. Bosco Ntaganda, confirming that such crimes fall
within the jurisdiction of the Court, and that rape and
sexual slavery of children by members of armed groups
can be prosecuted as war crimes under the Rome
Statute. However, we wish once again to recall that the
primary responsibility for prosecuting perpetrators or
those responsible lies with States.

Sexual violence in conflict situations is recognized
as a pillar of security challenges. At a time when
women and girls are often the first targets, men and
boys are also strategically targeted. While it is essential
that we maintain momentum in the fight against sexual
violence, it is also important to stress the importance
of building women's capacities as part of the solution.
Building women's capacities and increasing their
participation in decision-making bodies remains the
cornerstone of any response in the areas of prevention
and protection.

The full enjoyment of human rights has been
a priority of the Human Security Network since its
inception. The protection and promotion of rights are
a shared responsibility and can be achieved with the
firm commitment and action of the United Nations,
Member States and other actors. The Human Security
Network also stresses the importance of focusing on the
prevention of future violations and rehabilitating and
reintegrating those affected by those heinous crimes
through appropriate medical and psychological care.
In that regard, we commend the appointment of the
Victims' Rights Advocate, Ms. Jane Connors.

The States members of the Human Security Network
express strong support for the zero-tolerance policy
on sexual abuse and exploitation, and consequently,
a zero-impunity approach for all civilian staff, troops
and police of the United Nations and other international
peacekeeping operations, in accordance with the
Secretary-General's requests.

Finally, the Human Security Network calls on
the Security Council and Member States to take into
account the recommendations of the report of the
Secretary-General in their efforts to prevent and combat
sexual violence in conflict.

