Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open debate, as well as the briefers for their insightful
presentations. Brazil welcomes this opportunity to
exchange views and to learn from the best practices of
other countries.

Brazil recognizes the crucial role played by
uniformed and civilian women in peacekeeping, as
outlined in Brazil's first national action plan on women
and peace and security.

It is with great satisfaction that I can inform the
Council that the Brazilian national action plan, adopted
in March 2017 and initially effective for two years,
was extended for four more years. We expect that
this extended period of implementation will allow us
to continue to advance towards fulfilling the goals of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on
the topic.

Brazil's commitment to increasing the presence
of uniformed women in peacekeeping is a long-term
project. I am, however, pleased to be able to share some
positive results achieved within the first two years of
the implementation of Brazil's national action plan.

In 2017 the Brazilian Army Academy admitted, for
the first time, 34 women to train for combat careers.
More recently, in 2019, the Brazilian navy started to
welcome women candidates for all operative combat
positions, enabling them to be part of navy troops
deployed abroad.

Concerning Brazilian women who are already
deployed, we also celebrate the fact that Brazil is close
to the target set by the Secretariat for military and staff
officers, with approximately around 15 per cent and
12 per cent of women in each category, respectively.
Nevertheless, we remain committed to increasing these
numbers as well as those related to civilian and police
officers. In this regard, we welcome the progress made
possible by the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy
2018-2028 in facilitating conditions for the deployment
of uniformed and civilian women.

Furthermore, the Brazilian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs has eagerly sought to increase awareness among
women of opportunities for civilians in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
as well as to make sure that women are adequately
represented in matters relating to international peace
and security inside the Ministry's bureaucracy. The
achievement of these goals is central to Brazil's national
action plan.

As we approach the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), the women and peace and
security agenda must remain a priority for the Council.
In this regard, Brazil recalls the importance of
instruments such as the 2015 Global Study on resolution
1325 (2000) conducted by UN-Women, which inspired
Brazil's decision to formulate a national action plan.

In our view, the upcoming celebration could be an
opportunity to evaluate the progress achieved and the
challenges ahead. It could also motivate those Member
States that have yet to adopt their own national action
plans to do so.

While we recognize the positive results achieved,
we must acknowledge that the challenges ahead
are manifold and significant. In overcoming those
difficulties, we find that positive role models are
important at both a personal and a collective level. With
this in mind, I would like to once again congratulate
Commander Marcia Andrade Braga, a Brazilian
Navy officer currently serving as gender adviser
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
who a few days ago received the United Nations
Military Gender Advocate Award. Commander
Braga has now joined many other Brazilians who are
role models for uniformed and civilian women and
whose efforts inspire us to continue striving for the
greater participation of women in matters related to
international peace and security.

