Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): Let me begin
by thanking the Bolivian presidency for organizing
this debate and for producing an excellent concept
note (S/2018/904, annex). We also thank the Secretary-
General, Under-Secretary-General Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka and General Director Randa Siniora Atallah
for their presentations.

As neighbours in a region where we have long lived
peacefully, Brazil and Bolivia share the urgency in
promoting the women and peace and security agenda
in South America as a means to empower women and
girls, thereby ensuring that our region continues to
enjoy lasting peace. Moreover, Braziljoins with Bolivia
in commending the inspiring example of the significant
and successful inclusion of women in the peace process
in Colombia.

In 1919, the Brazilian biologist, lawyer, feminist,
politician and one of the four women delegates to the
San Francisco Conference Bertha Lutz wrote that the
greatest victory of our age would be the emancipation
of the woman: she awoke during the period of calm,
and when the time for conflict came, she was no longer
a pale shadow but had placed herself resolutely beside
man in order to fight and to win alongside him.

This year, Brazil celebrates the hundredth
anniversary of the admission of the first female
diplomat to our Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In 1918,
Maria Jose de Castro Rebello Mendes was not only the
first Brazilian female diplomat but also the first woman
to join the civil service in Brazilian history through a
public examination process.

Looking back on that century of the presence of
Brazilian women in our diplomacy, there is much to
celebrate but there are also challenges to overcome. In
that context, the women and peace and security agenda
is both a priority in our foreign policy and a means
to move forward towards gender equality through
domestic policies. Besides being a champion of gender
equality since the foundation of the United Nations
through Lutz's participation, Brazil has been a long-time
sponsor of the women and peace and security agenda in
the Security Council. We are particularly proud to have
integrated such an agenda into Brazil's South-South
cooperation policies by supporting projects aimed at
assisting victims of sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict-ridden regions in Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and
the Democratic Republic of Congo.

Last year, Brazil launched its first two-year national
action plan on women and peace and security. We are
now in the process of reviewing the implementation of
the plan. The Brazilian national action plan is based
on two main strategic objectives: mainstreaming and
empowerment. Those goals are key to the promotion
of women as agents of peace and to their protection
from gender-based violence. Also, Brazil's national
plan follows the four main pillars set out in resolution
1325 (2000): participation, protection, peacebuilding
and humanitarian cooperation, and awareness-raising
and engagement.

Our national action plan takes into consideration
Brazil's reality as a developing country that has been
at peace with its neighbours for 150 years and that
has demonstrated its willingness and capacity to
take on greater responsibilities in international peace
and security, whether in multilateral negotiations, in
support of peace processes, in peacekeeping operations
or in peacebuilding efforts.

So far, one of the main contributions of the national
plan has been to increase the visibility of the women
and peace and security agenda among multiple actors
in the Brazilian Government. Since the adoption of our
national action plan, Brazil has achieved other important
milestones. In 2017, the first women joined the army's
combat roles for the first time. They will now be able to
reach the highest posts in the army's hierarchy as they
progress in their careers. In addition, the Brazilian Peace
Operations Joint Training Centre has incorporated a
gender perspective based on the national action plan
into the preparation of military and police personnel,
as well as civilians, for peacekeeping operations.

The women and peace and security agenda is also
about diplomacy. We have sought, and continue to seek,
further dialogue and partnerships with countries in
order to exchange experiences related to that agenda.
Bilateral contacts with many countries on that issue
have added depth to the understandings achieved in
celebrated multilateral initiatives such as the National
Focal Points Network and the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security, as well as demonstrating
that the women and peace and security agenda is a
shared priority among many of us.

Besides launching a national plan on women and
peace and security, the Brazilian Government has taken
other important steps towards a greater presence of
women in political life. As ofMay, political parties must
allot at least 30 per cent of radio and television time, as
well as of their dedicated campaign financing fund, to
female candidates. Following the most recent federal
elections, earlier this month, women's participation
rose from 10 to 15 per cent of elected representatives
in the lower house of Congress, which is still very low.
One of the new representatives is Joenia Wapixana,
the first indigenous woman elected to the National
Congress. Today, she was also announced as one of the
three winners of the 2018 United Nations Prize in the
Field of Human Rights.

However, there are challenges ahead. Increasing the
number of women in the Brazilian military contingents
in peacekeeping operations is a major task. In pursuit of
that, we will take into consideration the very concrete
goals set last year by the Secretary-General to increase
the ratio of women military to 15 per cent and women
police officers to 20 per cent of the total personnel in
all peacekeeping operations.

As we celebrate 18 years since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), we must also regret the
fact that there is an increasing number of conflicts
around the globe. In that regard, Brazil reiterates its
unwavering commitment, as noted by Bertha Lutz, to
having men and women work side by side in order to
achieve lasting peace.

