Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your work as President
of the Security Council for the month of October. We
appreciate your delegation's initiative in convening this
open debate on the occasion of the eighth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on the topic
of women and peace and security. We also thank you
for the concept paper circulated in the past few days,
which provides guidance for the discussion.

Colombia, as a friend of resolution 1325 (2000),
has worked to promote and implement the mandates
contained in the resolution, in particular on the
commitment of States. As is pointed out in the concept
paper, resolution 1325 (2000) has become a guide for
national efforts to attain gender equity in
peacebuilding. In my country's case, the mandates
contained in the resolution have been incorporated into
different policies, plans and programmes that promote
peace, security and gender equity, particularly through
our national development plan for 2006-2010.

I wish briefly to share three initiatives under way
in my country in that respect. They illustrate how, from
a national perspective, it is possible to establish
practices that broaden and strengthen the role of
women in peacebuilding. The first consideration refers
to the need to make that participation a reality through
a long-term programmatic approach fully
mainstreamed in national policies. My country's
experience in drawing up the national human rights and
international humanitarian law action plan is based on
that approach.

The Colombian State, represented by 27 entities
that worked a year and a half on the agreement of the
plan, took the inclusion of the gender perspective as
one of its central criteria in all the thematic axes under
consideration. As a result, the main problems faced by
women were identified and strategies and action lines
created, aimed at girls, teenagers, adults and elderly
adults in various areas, such as education, work and
family. Moreover, emphasis has been placed on the
situation that women face as a consequence of the
violence generated by illegal armed groups and on the
actions that the State must take to guarantee and
redress their rights.

Thus, measures have been taken to ensure that the
gender perspective is incorporated into actions in the
area of human rights and international humanitarian
law from their very outset, rather than in reaction to
certain developments. It is important to highlight that
the national human rights and international
humanitarian law action plan is a State policy covering
a 15-year period.

The second consideration relates to the
establishment of spaces in which women's
contributions can have an impact on Government
decision-making. Women's community councils have
been in Colombia to that end. The councils provide a
space for women's dialogue at the provincial and
municipal levels. In that context, the "Women Building
Peace and Development" policy has been established,
and its implementation is moving forward
satisfactorily.

The members of the councils are women leaders
who represent diverse organizations and communities.
Their purpose is to enhance the civic participation of
women with a view not only to channelling the projects

and requests that women present to their local
communities, but also to establishing networks of
women's social organizations to combat violence and
promote gender equity. The councils monitor and
exercise social control over State policies for women
and act in coordination with the office of the
presidential adviser for women's equality, which
enables adequate follow-up of the actions taken and
achievements obtained.

Lastly, I wish to highlight the national experience
achieved through the so-called laboratories of peace.
That initiative has promoted reconciliation practices
that deactivate the causes of violence at the regional
level. In the development of the initiative, which
originated in the programme support for the peace
process in Colombia agreed with the European Union,
the role and participation of women have become
fundamental.

The broad movement of civil participation in
favour of peace has become a genuine social laboratory
in which, by using rule of law instruments, we are
exploring the routes that Colombian society and local
communities must take to end violence and favour
sustainable development. Such approaches have also
been translated into peace and development initiatives
led by local and regional women's, youth, Afro-
Colombian and indigenous organizations. Moreover,
they have enabled us to identify lessons learned and
innovative methodologies that can provide input for the
building of a public policy favourable to development
and peace.

The anticipated result for women, youth,
indigenous and Afro-Colombian groups is an increase
in their capacity to participate and influence the
policies, spaces and processes that contribute to the
strengthening of democratic institutions, peacebuilding
and the promotion of coexistence.

My delegation would like to highlight the
important role of the United Nations in promoting the
participation of women in the achievement of peace
and security. In our experience, the fundamental
element in the development of national initiatives has
been the acknowledgement of diversity as the basis of
democracy and the contribution of women in the
construction of peace, security and development. We
encourage the United Nations to maintain and deepen
that approach.
