Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French) I thank the President for organizing this
open debate.

Belgium associates itself fully with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to deliver the following remarks in my
national capacity.

In July, we adopted our third national action
plan regarding women and peace and security. The
new plan, which covers the period of 2017 to 2021,
encompasses numerous courses of action that should
contribute to improving the status of women in areas
of conflict, pre-conflict and post-conflict. Ensuring
the implementation of such an ambitious plan during
this period requires necessary follow-up. To that end,
frequent consultations among the Belgian departments
concerned, as well as with external actors, including
civil society and local women's organizations, is
critical. An annual report regarding progress achieved
will be submitted to Parliament.

Incorporating the gender perspective in peace
and security initiatives is among the pillars of our
policy. In that regard, concrete initiatives include
promoting the incorporation of the gender perspective
at the Peacebuilding Commission in developing new
integrated peacebuilding strategies as well as in the
semi-annual reviews of strategic frameworks. As a
member of the Peacebuilding Commission, we are
pleased that the Commission now has at its disposal
a mechanism that can better incorporate the women
peace and security agenda, thanks to gender-based
focal points.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2017/861)
rightly mentions the importance of improving technical
capacity-building in the area of gender equality as a
key strategy for incorporating and bolstering gender
equality in conflict prevention initiatives being
carried out by the United Nations. This technical
competency is also ofgreat importance in peacekeeping
operations - and all the more crucial when mandates
are revised, contingent levels are reduced or when the
financing of peacekeeping operations diminishes. In
the event, it is critical that gender adviser posts not
be affected.

A number of studies reflect the fact that
women's participation heightens the effectiveness of
humanitarian assistance, the credibility and quality
of peacekeeping, as well as heightening the speed of
economic recovery in post-conflict situations and
the sustainability of peace agreements. The role of
women - for example, in security sector reform - is
often underestimated. A greater presence of women
within reformed, mixed security forces strengthens the
link between the State and citizens. It contributes to a
more peaceful relationship between security forces and
civilians, with the view to a lasting end to a crisis.

Women are a force for peace, and it is therefore
critical for women to be able to fully play their
role as political actors in the service of peace and
conflict prevention. Belgium seeks to contribute to
this empowerment of women, including in the realm
of mediation. In that regard, here in new York next
April, we will convene a seminar on the role of women
in mediation in Africa, so as to identify ways so to
strengthen their involvement.

To conclude, I would like to note that, as a candidate
for a non-permanent seat in the Security Council,
Belgium expects and hopes to continue to actively
engage in the women and peace and security agenda.
