Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
It gives my delegation particular pleasure to see you,
Sir, presiding over this open debate on women and
peace and security. My delegation warmly welcomes
the convening of this meeting and hopes that the
outcome of this historic debate will contribute to a
better understanding of the gender dimension of peace
processes.

It is significant that in recognition of the
importance that your country attaches to this issue, the
seminar on "Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective in
Multidimensional Peace Support Operations" was held
in Windhoek from 29 to 31 May 2000. In this regard
my delegation supports the Namibia Plan of Action and
the call made to the Secretary-General to ensure that
appropriate follow-up measures are undertaken to
implement it.

This debate on women, peace and security is an
important reminder to all of us of the need to resolve
conflicts, particularly those in Africa and elsewhere
which are of grave concern to all of us. Due to these
conflicts, about six million Africans are refugees and
over 15 million people are displaced, between 60 and
80 per cent of whom are women and children.

The 2000 Machel review points out, in chapter 5,
that:

"During armed conflict, women and girls are
continually threatened by rape, domestic
violence, sexual exploitation, trafficking, sexual
humiliation and mutilation."

They are at risk in all settings - be it at home, in flight
or in camps. In some cases, systematic rape and terror
are used as weapons of war. After having been
subjected to such atrocities, they are left with scars that
take longer to heal.

There is no denying that it is women who
shoulder the responsibility of supporting their families
and communities. Women serve alongside their male
counterparts in times of war. It is also women who
serve at the forefront of peace movements. Under these
circumstances, it is evident that we cannot continue
excluding women from conflict resolution processes.
Expanding the role of women in this area is imperative,
not only to address inequities but also to ensure that
our societies benefit from their approaches to
preventing conflicts, solving conflicts and building
peace.

Being direct victims of violence and
discrimination, women have gained a great
understanding of the need to address peace
comprehensively. It is encouraging to note that given
the prevalence of conflicts, particularly in Africa today,
women have taken some initiatives to promote peaceful
resolution of conflicts and to generate a culture of
peace. In this context, the role of Burundian women in
the peace process in their country - and the
recognition of that role by President Nelson Mandela,
the Facilitator of the Burundi peace process - should
serve as an example and as a source of inspiration to
the international community. It is the hope of my
delegation that the Council will adopt a resolution that
gives due weight to the role that women can play in
peace negotiations and accord them due recognition.
The international community needs, therefore, to agree
on a framework that guarantees women that right.

Both the final outcome document of the twenty-
third special session of the General Assembly entitled
"Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century" and the Millennium
Summit Declaration place emphasis on shared
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. On the occasion of International Women's
Day on 8 March, the then President of the Security
Council, Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh,
observed in a statement to the Press:

"Members of the Council note that although
women have begun to play an important role in
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peace-
building, they are still under-represented in
decision-making in regard to conflict. If women
are to play an equal part in security and
maintaining peace, they must be empowered
politically and economically, and represented
adequately at all levels of decision-making, both
at the pre-conflict stage and during hostilities, as
well as at the point of peacekeeping, peace-
building, reconciliation and reconstruction."

In reiterating this position, we call on the international
community and Governments to intensify efforts aimed
at the realization of the objective set out in that
statement, including the enhancement of the role of
women in various phases of the transition to peace and
post-conflict reconstruction.

