Ms. Murabit: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to address it on this historic occasion.

When I was growing up, my mother told me she
always saw everything, courtesy of the two extra eyes
she had in the back of her head. I made many attempts
to disprove her, and needless to say, I was caught every
time. What I did not know then was that my mother had
just taught me a valuable lesson and that I would use it
daily in my work as a peace and security advocate: that
the very women who lead families and societies know
first and best what is happening in them and how to
address it.

My organization, the Voice of Libyan Women,
launched its first national project, the Libyan Women's
Charter, in 2011. In the midst of revolutionary euphoria,
we spoke with thousands of women nationally, who
expressed their excitement at the potential opportunities
that awaited them. But even then, they recognized and
spoke of the challenges, of how tensions would grow if
transitional justice and reconciliation were not sought
out through legitimate structures, of the growing
security risk of the open Sahara border, and of their
increasing exclusion from the political arena. They
listed their priorities with clarity and purpose: to get the
weapons out of their homes and their family members
back to work. As history has since proven, their words
were the truest reflection of the impact of unaddressed
conflicts and increasing insecurity.

Women did not just speak while men vied for
power and property. It was women who began to piece
the country back together. It was women who in record
numbers founded organizations and initiatives and
who through education, media, political reform and
economic empowerment were fighting for a truly free
Libya. During the next three years, women were the
first to feel the effects of ongoing fighting and the first
to notice the signs of rising extremism. In fact, as early
as 2012, they warned ofthe increasing danger in driving
alone, the increasing calls for school segregation and
how religious manipulation was being used by religious
and political leaders to promote polarization in their
society.

It was on that basis that my organization launched
the Noor Campaign, led by women and built on
their partnership with men and religious actors to
build peace and security in Libya. By leveraging the
strengths of women in our national network - their
ideas, community credibility, unparalleled networks
and influence - we were able to reach communities,
men and boys in particular, in staggering numbers,
enlisting them as our partners in countering extremist
messages and preventing violence.

As a member of the high-level advisory group
concerned with resolution 1325 (2000), I can tell the
Council that our experience in Libya is not unique. In
conflict and post-conflict countries around the world,
women are seen as less threatening politically and
economically and, for that reason, garner more societal
trust than their male peers. In fact, the importance
of including women seems to be a glaringly obvious
strategy. As recent events have made clear, extremist
organizations not only recognize women's agency but
are extremely effective in speaking to and working
with women for their own advantage, to the detriment
of global peace and security.

We know how much the women and peace and
security agenda needs the continued commitment of the
United Nations. That is an undeniable fact. However, a
less acknowledged truth is that the United Nations and
its Member States are not meeting the expectations of
the global community, and that is because they continue
to ignore the one tool that has never been more urgent
for us to utilize - the participation of women at all
levels.

The ongoing peace process in Colombia, for
example, has so much to teach us. After more than 60
years ofwar and countless peace processes, all exclusive
and all failing, the political process was opened up with
the help of the United Nations and Norway's mediation.
Both sides brought victims' voices and experiences to
the negotiating table, 60 per cent of whom were women.
They humanized the war, mobilizing their communities
to support the peace talks. I wish we had a civil society

representative from Colombia in the Chamber today
to show us what gains can be made when the United
Nations and Member States work together to ensure
inclusive peace processes.

From my own experience in Libya, I know that the
only reliable requirement for admission to peace talks
is a gun. The lack of actionable commitment by the
United Nations and its Member States to women and
peace and security beyond these walls only validates
those who exclude women from negotiations at home.
The United Nations must prioritize the inclusion of
women here.

A few years ago, religious and political actors met
with members of the international community in Libya
to discuss transitional justice and rising city and tribal
tensions. As they were seated, one of the international
representatives thanked the Libyan counterparts
for attending. Noting the low number of women in
attendance, he asked: "Where are the women?" His
Libyan counterpart looked around and replied with a
laugh: "Well, where are yours?"

Women's inclusion is paramount to global stability,
and their action on the ground needs to reflect our
commitments on paper. I would like to make three
recommendations based on the my own extensive work
and that of my civil society colleagues working on the
issue of women and peace and security globally.

First, conflict prevention is paramount to ensuring
global peace and security, rather than only reactively
addressing erupting conflicts and adopting overly
militarized, band-aid strategies, which promote rather
than diffuse local conflicts. The United Nations,
Member States and the Security Council should instead
address underlying drivers of conflict. Resources,
expertise and influence should be concentrated on the
prevention and mitigation of conflicts. That means
focusing on justice, global disarmament, effective
economic policies, representative political structures,
accountable media and social freedoms.

The participation of women is critical in the
prevention of conflict. Women already engage in
unofficial prevention practices in their communities.
That should be recognized and institutionalized into
official early warning systems and programmes.
The engagement of women cannot continue to be
one of convenience, when women are included only
to implement processes that the United Nations and
Member States have decided in their absence. Women
must be engaged at the very onset at the decision- and
policy-making level. An example is the countering of
violent extremism strategy; the narrative is one that is
very militant. The aim of women peace activists is to
prevent violent extremism.

Secondly, we urgently need a mechanism to address
crisis situations. Emergencies are not gender-neutral.
Research has proven that they disproportionately affect
women and girls, who are often assaulted, exploited
and abused for personal and economic gain. Women's
rights are violated as they are forced into marriage by
armed groups and forced into religious conversion, and
women's rights activists are targeted for violence for
their own activism or for that of male family members.

While there have been increased efforts to ensure
more effective gender programming by organizations
and Member States alike, they are uncoordinated,
unenforced and insufficient. The United Nations
needs to create an accountable and authoritative first-
response structure within the Security Council, such
as an informal expert group that will guarantee greater
coordination throughout the multilateral system and
provide greater relief to defenders of women's human
rights who are at risk on the ground.

Finally, there is an arguable need to allocate adequate
resources and increase the financial commitments
made to women and peace and security. That must be
accompanied by the removal of structural, political
and bureaucratic barriers that limit the accessibility
of funds and resources to activists on the ground.
Dedicated contributions specific to programmes led
by women that address the distinct needs of women in
conflict and post-conflict environments are vital.

There is no doubt that resolution 1325 (2000)
was a tipping point for the global community and the
women and peace and security agenda, opening doors
and shifting the political discourse. I am of the new
generation of women peace activists, from a country
that was under dictatorship 15 years ago. Yet the 1325
agenda proved to be relevant to me and no doubt will
be to women and societies in other countries for years
to come. But we cannot forget that it was the relentless
leadership of civil society activists, veterans of the
struggle for peace, that ensured the adoption of that
very resolution 15 years ago.

We are not backing down. Every day, we put our lives
on the line and do our part for peace. It is time for the
United Nations and Member States to do theirs. Only by

partnering with women and civil society organizations
on the front lines can we counter the rising threats of
insecurity, whether extremism, resource exploitation,
mass migration, global warming or any of the myriad
causes of conflict. It is time we shifted our support
back to where it matters most - women.

When the Security Council finds it unthinkable
to address a crisis without addressing women's rights,
when humanitarian responders have full funding for
their gender-specific services, when women grass-roots
leaders find their work fully funded and politically
supported, when it is unimaginable that peace talks be
held without women's full engagement, only then will
the full potential of resolution 1325 (2000) be realized.

