Mrs. Brandt (Netherlands): First of all, I wish to
sincerely thank the briefers for their insight and urgent
advice 4 the "to-do list", as Minister Wallstrom
called it.

I would also like to state that the Kingdom of the
Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.

If we want to build lasting peace and security, we
need women. It is as simple as that and makes perfect
sense. All of us present here support that. After all, it
was the Security Council that unanimously adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), 18 years ago. Subsequently,
several more resolutions were adopted, further
strengthening our commitment to women and peace and
security. We did that because it makes perfect sense;
because we know that, when women are involved, there
is a better chance for lasting peace; because we know
that inclusive peace is lasting peace.

If we know all of that and if the rationale is so
clear, why is it that women are still excluded from
peace processes? Why is it that women still make up
only 8 per cent of negotiators - a percentage that
has hardly moved in recent years? The statistics were
clearly pointed out today by the Executive Director of
UN-Women. Is it because, although we know, we still
have not been able to sufficiently change our mindset,
to change the way we think about leadership, roles and
power? Have we therefore not acted with the urgency
that is needed?

We see the same in the world of business. Research
has shown that diverse boards with men and women at
the top perform better and actually make profits go up.
We therefore know there is a clear business case, but we
hardly see the needle moving. We see the rationale but
we do not act on it, because we have not changed who
we see as leaders and whose experience and judgment
we value most. The same applies to involving women in
peace and security. In our eagerness to stop violence,
we first make place at the table for those who picked up
arms, largely men. Women, whom we know are crucial
for peaceful solutions, are left out or relegated to a
second or third track, despite what we know.

That is why we are happy that the focus of
this debate is not on why but on how we move from
knowing to truly believing and then acting. We can act
in our own organizations and countries by including
women in decision-making processes and through our
national action plans. When it comes to women and
peace and security, the Council has shown that, if it
wants to act, it can. For example, the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
now calls for the full and effective participation of
women in decision-making. For the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, the Council requested an
increase the number of women and ensuring their
meaningful participation in all aspects of the operation.
As the Secretary-General pointed out, we have now
significantly increased the number of female briefers,
including from civil society, and on 8 March we held a
Council meeting with a two-thirds majority of women
around the table for the first time.

We have begun to tackle impunity for sexual
violence in conflict through the use of sanctions by
including a stand-alone criterion on sexual violence in
the South Sudan sanctions regime. Last Monday's Arria
Formula meeting again reinforced the message that
sanctions are a tool that could be used more effectively
by the Council when it comes to combating sexual
violence in conflict. There still is a lot to do to translate
that into change on the ground, but I agree that we have
to resist pessimism. If we really move from knowing
to acting, we can make further progress together. Let
me ask for attention to two areas in which we need to
act now.

The first is that we need to stand up firmly against
violence inflicted upon women leaders, because it is
precisely those women active in providing support and
contributing to peace processes who are targeted by
those who have no interest in peace. Just think of the 83
women human rights defenders who have been killed
since the signing of the peace agreement in Colombia,
or think of the brave women who worked in Nigeria
and were murdered for saving other women's lives.
We must stand up for them and act. The Council has
a critical role to play in preventing and responding to
such horrific violence.

The second area is that we need to get better at
learning from what works. As Minister Wallstrom just
pointed out, the 2016 comprehensive peace agreement
in Colombia has set an international example for
women's involvement. Civil society played a big role
by demanding an inclusive peace process, and so we
saw much higher percentages of women in the two
negotiating teams and women contributing to the peace
process at all levels. We must learn from that and make
that a reality in other parts of the world as well by
appointing female mediators and including women at
the negotiation table in places such as Syria and Yemen.

Women candidates are available. Women are more
than ready to play their part. We should make sure
that they can. I think that we have run out of excuses.
We know, so we now need to act. Let us make women
participate. Let us protect those that do. Let us listen to
them and empower them. Women are ready, so surely
we should be as well. Together we can make inclusive
peace a reality.

