Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation wishes
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the
issue of sexual exploitation and abuse in the United
Nations system, including measures undertaken to
strengthen the Organization's response, as outlined
in his report (A/70/729) to the General Assembly. The
presence of the Secretary-General today demonstrates
his clear commitment to addressing that challenge,
which threatens to cast a long, dark shadow on the
Organization's reputation. We welcome many of the
messages he outlined to confront sexual exploitation
and abuse and, as he has rightly said, to ensure that
the United Nations becomes the vehicle of hope for the
most vulnerable.

We also take note of the findings and
recommendations on the issue of sexual exploitation
and abuse contained in various reports and reviews,
most recently the report of the high-level external
independent review panel on sexual exploitation
and abuse by international peacekeeping forces in
the Central African Republic. We were particularly
concerned over the findings of fragmentation of
responsibility within the United Nations system and
view the troubling lack of coordination as a major gap
that needs to be addressed. In that regard, we welcome
the appointment of Ms. Jane Holl Lute as Special
Coordinator on improving the United Nations response
to exploitation and abuse and look forward to continued
updates on the recommendations and implementations.

We believe that sexual exploitation and abuse
cannot be tackled in isolation. It requires the collective
and concerted commitment and political will of all
Members of the United Nations and the international
community. We support the intention to address the
sexual exploitation and abuse issue in a broader and
more systematic manner across the United Nations
system. In that connection, we note the Security
Council's draft resolution, initiated by the United States
delegation, and we will work constructively on it.

Malaysia also reaffirms the central role of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
which has been mandated by the wider membership to
deliberate on all issues relating to United Nations peace
operations. It is important that our parallel efforts be
complementary with our shared aim to eliminate the
sexual exploitation and abuse, seek accountability and
alleviate the harm caused to vulnerable people.

Accountability for perpetrators of sexual
exploitation and abuse cannot be achieved under
a shroud of secrecy. Therefore, we are supportive
of the Secretary-General's measures to increase
transparency in the accountability process. However,
we reiterate that Member States, particularly the troop-
and police-contributing countries, have the primary
responsibility to hold their personnel accountable
for sexual exploitation and abuse. In order to do so,
information and credible evidence regarding allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse must be channelled
by the United Nations in a timely manner to Member
States for subsequent action.

Malaysia believes that improving investigation
procedures for sexual exploitation and abuse
allegations increases the accountability process.
Therefore, we are supportive of such initiatives,
including the establishment of immediate response
teams at peacekeeping missions to gather and preserve
evidence and the adoption of a six-month time line for
the completion of their investigations.
We reaffirm that Malaysia enforces a strict zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse for
our peacekeeping troops. All Malaysian peacekeepers
undergo compulsory predeployment training in which
specific modules and briefings are conducted to raise
awareness of acts that constitute sexual exploitation
and abuse and the consequences of committing such
acts. We also have national laws in place to ensure the
prosecution and punishment ofMalaysian peacekeeping
personnel for serious misconduct, including sexual
exploitation and abuse. We hope that the strong
measures announced by the Secretary-General to
strengthen accountability for sexual exploitation and
abuse, including imposing sanctions against those
who commit acts of misconduct and who fail to take
actions against them, will create a deterrent effect and
galvanize prevention efforts at the highest level.

We also note the decision of the Secretary-General
to repatriate contingents where there is a demonstrated
pattern of abuse or non-response to allegations of
misconduct, which we view as a measure of last resort.
At the same time, we call on the Secretary-General
to issue clear criteria and guidelines in making such
decisions and to engage constructively with police- and
troop-contributing countries on that issue.

We must not forget that our discussion today
was triggered by heinous acts against children by
international peacekeepers, both United Nations and
non-United Nations, in the Central African Republic.
The series of sexual exploitation and abuse cases
involving children and the failure to provide timely
follow-up assistance to the victims underscores the
continued need to raise awareness on and mainstream
child protection in peacekeeping operations. We urge
mission leadership to instil a culture of child protection
in peacekeeping missions and stress the important role
that child protection advisers can play in preventing
and responding to allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse against children. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism established under the Security Council's
children and armed conflict framework should be
utilized to collect and analyse information on sexual
exploitation and abuse allegations involving child
victims in order to ensure that necessary follow-up
actions can be provided.

Knowledge is the best defence and the provision
of training for peacekeeping personnel cannot be
overstated as a means of prevention. Therefore, we
also advocate mandatory predeployment training
on child protection, in addition to training on sexual
exploitation and abuse prevention for all United Nations
peacekeepers, and we support the Secretary-General's
initiative for troop- and police-contributing countries
to issue certificates of compliance.

There is a tendency to discuss sexual exploitation
and abuse in the abstract, in terms of numbers and
percentages that keep us detached from the reality of
sexual exploitation and abuse cases. In comprehensively
addressing the issue, let us remember that these are real
people - mothers, daughters, fathers and sons - who
suffer the anguish and harm of sexual exploitation and
abuse. The international community must ensure that
they receive the necessary attention, including medical
and psychological assistance. They must be our priority
in pursuing accountability.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming my delegation's
readiness to work closely with Council members and
other partners and stakeholders, especially the troop-
and police-contributing countries, as well as the
Secretariat, to address our common aims. The pledge
taken by all United Nations peacekeepers, entitled "We
are United Nations peacekeepers", recognizes the Blue
Helmets as the embodiment of the aspirations of all
the people of the world for peace. The expectations of
the international community and the local populations
who they are sent to protect are extremely high. That
is why cases of sexual exploitation and abuse and the
subsequent failure to take action by the international
community are very painful to confront. However, only
when we are honest about our own shortcomings can
we genuinely work to overcome them. Only then can we
live up to the lofty ideals we seek to uphold.

