Ms. Rice (United States of America):
Mr. President, I want to begin by thanking you and
your delegation for hosting this very important event
and for ensuring that it remains front and centre on the
Council's agenda. I also want to thank the Secretary-
General very much for his important report
(S/2009/3 62) and his very helpful recommendations, as
well as for his presence here today.

Throughout history, sexual violence has often
occurred in places racked by armed conflict. But over
the past decade, reporting from several countries has
confirmed that rape is becoming increasingly frequent
and brutal, and in some places a systematic weapon of
war. In response, the Security Council has adopted
resolution 1820 (2008), repeatedly condemned these
crimes and called on all parties to immediately end acts
of rape and sexual violence during armed conflicts.

But thousands of women and girls are still being
gang-raped, mutilated, assaulted and forced into sexual
slavery every single day. This we must end. I will
never forget when we took our trip to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and met with two very eloquent
victims of rape and sexual violence at the Heal Africa
Hospital. They spoke movingly of the horrible, horrible
crimes they had experienced. After our discussion, I
had the opportunity briefly to speak privately with the
older of those two women. She pulled me aside, I think
looking to me as the one woman on the Security
Council at present. She asked me, with tears in her
eyes, to do everything I could, and that we could, to
end this horrible systematic violence that she and so
many others had experienced. I gave her my word that
I would, and, with the cooperation and support of my
fellow Council members, I intend to keep my word.

This is because sexual assaults against women are
often committed in front of their husbands and
children, and they do more than inflict appalling
physical, mental and emotional injuries on their
victims. They can also spread HIV/AIDS and other
diseases, produce unwanted children who become
neglected or orphans and undermine families and
communities when the survivors are stigmatized and
shamed. All too often, the result is a smouldering anger
and an insatiable desire for revenge that only worsens
the violence and makes peace agreements all the harder
to reach or sustain.
We must end these atrocities. We must better
protect women and girls, halt the impunity that
perpetrators enjoy and make it easier to achieve lasting
and inclusive peace. To succeed, we need to ensure that
rapists and other perpetrators of sexual violence are
identified and punished. We need sustained efforts to
prevent new acts of sexual violence, including by
increasing human rights training and vetting for
members of domestic security forces. We also need
quality and accessible treatment for survivors of rape
and abuse.

At the same time, we need to collect more data on
sexual violence, share United Nations reporting more
widely and bring that information into the Security
Council in real time. The Secretary-General's report
includes several recommendations that could
dramatically improve current practice. Building on
resolution 1820 (2008), the United States urges the
Council to consider these recommendations seriously
and to act swiftly on them.

Job one is to hold perpetrators accountable, and
so the United States supports credible domestic or
hybrid and international accountability mechanisms
that investigate and prosecute these crimes, particularly
in countries incapable of bringing such criminals to
effective justice. We aim to build State capacity to enforce
the rule of law through a range of measures, from
technical assistance through training by international
lawyers to assistance in drafting legislation.

In this regard, I would like to say a few words
specifically about the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where the interlinked problems of sexual
violence and impunity are particularly grave.
According to the United Nations Population Fund,
nearly 16,000 new cases of sexual violence were
registered throughout the country in 2008, with 65 per
cent of those cases involving children. Yet data
collected from provincial health centres between 2005
and 2007 suggest that Congolese courts heard only
2 per cent of the registered rape cases in the conflict-
ridden eastern Congo.

Some cases against accused Congolese
perpetrators of mass atrocities are pending in the
International Criminal Court, but we should establish
other mechanisms for ensuring accountability and
bringing perpetrators to justice. A commission of
inquiry, as suggested by the Secretary-General, is one
option that deserves serious consideration. The Council
should also explore deployment of technical assistance
teams to develop the capacity to combat sexual
violence in all conflict zones. These teams could
determine the feasibility of establishing a dedicated
chamber in domestic courts that would prosecute war
crimes and crimes against humanity, with a substantial
focus on sexual and gender-based violence.

We welcome the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's recently announced zero-
tolerance policy for members of its security forces who
commit sexual violence. We also welcome the April
2009 launch of a comprehensive strategy by the United
Nations and the Congolese Government for combating
gender-based violence. And we will continue to insist
on the complete resolution of the five cases discussed
by the Council earlier this week. We welcome the
efforts of the United Nations Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
recent approval of a six-officer sexual violence unit to
help the Mission implement its protection mandate, and
we encourage MONUC to work further with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on this immense problem. And we will work with the
Congolese and all stakeholders to help craft more
effective solutions.

Next, we need specialized leadership and high-
level attention at the United Nations, to focus on
implementing the goals of resolution 1820 (2008). The
United States believes that the appointment of a high-
level special representative on women and peace and
security by the Secretary-General for a specified period
of time would help focus the Secretariat's efforts. This
time-limited mandate would be to review and
streamline multisectoral responses to sexual violence
in conflict situations, promote integrated and
coordinated approaches, bolster the role of women in
peace negotiations and peacekeeping operations, and
promote accountability for the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008).

Thirdly, we should use targeted measures to
thwart sexual violence as a tactic of war. We fully
support the report's recommendations on incorporating
provisions on sexual violence in armed conflict into
existing sanctions regimes, as appropriate. To best
apply such targeted measures and give the Council the
up-to-date information it needs, information-sharing
among all Council-mandated bodies is essential. The
Secretary-General's relevant Special Representatives
and emergency relief coordinators should work with
Member States to develop comprehensive, joint
Government-United Nations strategies for combating
sexual violence, in consultation with all relevant
stakeholders. They should also provide regular updates
on sexual violence in their reporting to the Secretary-
General and the Security Council.

Fourthly, to curb rape and sexual violence by
military officers, we must create a culture of awareness
and accountability within national militaries, starting
with the top commanders and marching all the way
down the chain of command. Neither soldiers nor
officers should be able to commit sexual violence,
especially with impunity. Perpetrators must not be
promoted. We must work to build up effective vetting
mechanisms that will exclude persons who face
credible allegations and evidence of crimes.

We in the international community need to
explore ways to foster such a culture of accountability
through better training, capacity-building and other
targeted programmes. And the United Nations needs to
lead by example, by actively enforcing the zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations peacekeepers. Simply put, abusers
cannot be allowed to serve in United Nations
peacekeeping missions, now or in the future.

Efforts to combat sexual violence must also be
placed squarely on the political agenda when countries
are searching for lasting stability and peace. The
United Nations and its Member States and future
mediators should address sexual violence in today's
peace processes and include them from the very start in
future peace talks. In addition, we must include more
women as mediators and members of negotiating
teams.

During last year's open debate on sexual violence
(see S/PV.59l6), the former Division Commander of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) warned
against the troubling dynamic of men with guns
forgiving other men with guns for crimes committed
against women. If peace processes are to succeed and
endure, they must avoid this pitfall.

Finally, reporting by the Secretary-General on
sexual violence in conflict zones is critically important
to all these efforts, and we endorse the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend a standing
invitation to the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Special Rapporteur on violence against
women and the Chairperson of the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict to provide
additional briefings on sexual violence and to
supplement the information received from the Special
Representatives and the emergency relief coordinators
as the situation arises. We also want continued annual
reporting on this topic by the Secretary-General and we
welcome his commitment to provide it.

Beyond the measures that the Security Council
can take, important aspects of the problem of sexual
violence must be pursued in other bodies, including in
the General Assembly's discussion of a new gender
architecture. We will work with other stakeholders
within the United Nations system and non-government
organizations to end impunity and assist the victims of
rape and sexual assault.

We have a great deal to do to fully implement
resolution 1820 (2008). Putting this topic on the
world's agenda was an important step forward, but it
was just a first step. We now look forward to working
with our fellow Council members, the Secretariat and
other partners to bring a halt to and prevent further
sexual violence in armed conflict once and for all. The
task is massive, and the time is now.

