Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I am pleased to
join representatives of States with an outstanding
peacekeeping record in expressing our sincere gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for organizing today's important
debate and for Germany's dedication and support of
United Nations peacekeeping. As I am about to deliver
a statement in my national capacity, I would also like to
highlight that Ukraine aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union.

As we are approaching the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations next year, we should be honest with
ourselves and our peoples: we all know very well the list
ofmissed opportunities and the scope ofunimplemented
potential of the Organization. That is a luxury the world
cannot really afford, as year after year it continues to
face a growing number of challenges to international
peace and security, including those that gave rise to
the very emergence of the Organization - inter-State
conflicts and military aggression.

At the same time, it is also clear that the United
Nations can be and on many occasions has been
efficient in terms of safeguarding international peace
and security. It has at its disposal peacekeeping
operations - a reliable and commonly used instrument
for curbing and preventing conflicts and ensuring
sustaining peace. Therefore, we strongly support
comprehensive and decisive actions aimed at the
improvement of the United Nations peacekeeping
pillar's efficiency, thereby giving our Organization
appropriate abilities to address contemporary
challenges in the peace and security domain.
It is true also that in order to secure peace and
stability, our Organization must be proactive and
preventive in its actions. We welcome and fully support
the efforts of the Secretary-General to implement
robust United Nations reform aimed at strengthening
its peace and security architecture. My delegation fully
supported the Action for Peace initiative at the high-
level event organized by the Secretary-General on that
initiative in September 2018.

We believe that gender parity must remain an
integral part of such action. In this regard, we would
like to express our gratitude for and satisfaction with
the information provided by the Secretary-General on
practical steps taken to implement the gender parity
strategy for uniformed personnel in peace operations.

My country has always been a strong and reliable
partner of the Organization in peacekeeping activities.
Ukrainian peacekeepers, women and men alike, were
part of a number of United Nations peacekeeping
success stories. Among the most recent was the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, in which the Ukrainian
contingent, equipped with attack and military-transport
helicopters, took active part from the beginning. I
should underline that Ukraine is also incorporating
gender parity positive changes in developing legislation,
planning and budgeting, as well as in integrating the
subject of women, peace and security in the ongoing
security and defence sector reform.

The numbers speak for themselves. Over the course
of past five years the number of female servicemen
reached the mark of 10.6 per cent, which is about
25,000. As of today, there are about 70 women in the
rank of colonel serving in the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
With the entry into force last October of the Law on
Gender Equality Between Men and Women During
Military Service in the Armed Forces of Ukraine
and Other Military Formations, women now have the
opportunity to enter into contract for military service
and to enjoy equal access to military ranks, positions
and equal responsibility during their service.

Moreover, the revised national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
includes important provisions aimed at increasing
women's participation in peacebuilding processes
and peacekeeping operations, conducting a gender
assessment and providing gender-responsive services to
people affected by conflict, ensuring human rights and
the protection of women's rights. I am confident that as
a result of such reforms, we will see more women from
Ukraine in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Nowadays, Ukrainian women contribute greatly
to peace operations in different hotspots, but they
do even more to protect their own land from foreign
aggression, including by serving in the Joint Forces
Operation in the Ukrainian Donbas. It is very symbolic
that Ukraine, exactly like Ukrainian peacekeepers, has
done its best to uphold international peace and security
by participating in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Now, we expect the United Nations and its
peacekeeping operations to do the same by putting an
end to the suffering of Ukraine's people in the conflict
unleashed against my country.

I should like to recall the statement delivered
by my President at the aforementioned Action for
Peacekeeping high-level event that a multinational
peacekeeping force under Security Council mandate, if
deployed, could become a decisive factor in bringing
peace to Ukraine. Today, we would like to see the
United Nations peacekeeping potential be put to use in
resolving the Russian-Ukrainian conflict. Ukraine, for
its part as a peace-loving nation, will continue to be an
active participant in the United Nations peacekeeping
endeavours, including by widening the geography of its
presence in operations around the world.

