Mr. Marschik (Austria): I have the honour to
take the floor on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and the other countries aligning themselves with this
statement.
In trying to help the Council make the best use of
its time, I should like to draw attention to my
delegation's written statement, copies of which are
being distributed; I shall limit myself to a number of
salient points.

It is deeply regrettable that the United Nations
has had to confront instances of sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeeping personnel. It is tragic that the
shameful misconduct of a few should detract from the

vital contribution to peace and security made by the
women and men serving in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The credibility of the United
Nations and the viability of United Nations
peacekeeping operations is undermined by such
appalling behaviour. It is imperative that this scourge
be stamped out.

The European Union has supported from the
beginning the strong stance taken by the Secretary-
General on this issue, including his initiative in
appointing an Adviser on the question of sexual
exploitation and abuse, Prince Zeid of Jordan. The EU
has been encouraged by the sense of urgency shared by
the members of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations last year following
publication of the report prepared by Prince Zeid
(A/59/710). Last April the Special Committee made a
number of recommendations for urgent action,
addressed to the Secretary-General, to the Secretariat
and to Member States themselves. The central theme
underlying those recommendations is the need to
establish and implement a policy of zero tolerance
towards sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

In May last year (see S/PV.5191), the Security
Council added further momentum to these efforts when
it welcomed the Special Committee's report
(A/59/19/Add.1) and called on the Secretary-General
and on troop-contributing countries to ensure
implementation of the recommendations without delay.
The Security Council also set itself the task of
considering inclusion of provisions on prevention,
monitoring, investigation and reporting of misconduct
cases in its own resolutions concerning peacekeeping
mandates. We are pleased to see that the Council has
since acted along those lines on several occasions.

The European Union welcomes the opportunity
offered by today's meeting to press for renewed efforts
to ensure speedy implementation of all outstanding
recommendations from the Special Committee's report.
The time line for full implementation of those
recommendations - no later than 1 June 2007 - must
be respected.

As regards achievements to date, the EU is pleased
to see that the Secretariat has already taken some of the
steps that fall within its purview and has set in train
measures to implement others. The EU welcomes the
Secretariat's work on a revised draft model memorandum
of understanding for troop contributors and hopes that
these efforts will lead to its adoption by the General
Assembly before the end of its sixtieth session. The EU is
also pleased to see the progress on establishing a
professional and independent investigative capacity in the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS). It is crucial
that effective cooperation be assured between OIOS and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). The
EU encourages collaboration between troop-contributing
countries and the OIOS investigative capacity in order to
ensure that any evidence collected is admissible in the
relevant national jurisdiction. That is vital in the fight
against impunity for acts of misconduct.

Given the importance of keeping the interests of the
victims, female and male, adults and children, at the
forefront of all these efforts, the EU also warmly
welcomes the Secretariat's progress in developing a bold
and comprehensive policy on support to victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse. We look forward to discussion on
this in the upcoming session of the Special Committee.
Likewise, the EU strongly supports the establishment of a
sufficient number of conduct and discipline teams to meet
the need for such capacity in peacekeeping missions, and
it favours the transformation of the present Headquarters
team into a permanent conduct and discipline unit in
DPKO, as proposed by the Secretary-General in his
report.

High standards of conduct and discipline must be
applied to all categories of peacekeeping personnel. A
particular responsibility rests with us, the Member
States, to train, to prepare and to hold accountable
members of national contingents, including at the very
senior level.

The EU has taken measures to ensure that there is
a policy of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and
abuse by personnel participating in its own European
Security and Defence Policy operations. Though
individual EU member States retain jurisdiction over
their national troop and police contingents, the
European Union has taken steps to standardize the
norms of behaviour for all categories of personnel
participating in such operations. Moreover, those
generic standards clarify the responsibilities of senior
commanders and management, require their
incorporation into the planning documents of every
operation under the European Security and Defence
Policy, call for the establishment of complaint
procedures and reporting mechanisms and require the
inclusion of education on the standards of behaviour
into national as well as EU-level pre-deployment
training.

None of us should become complacent on a
subject as serious as this. The EU remains fully
committed to intensifying its efforts, and it encourages
the wider United Nations membership and the
Secretariat to remain so as well.

