Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank the delegations of the United Kingdom and
South Africa for resuming this important open debate
on women, peace and security. Our meeting today is
being held as we approach a number of anniversaries,
including the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, adopted at the
fourth World Conference on Women, and the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
which calls for the central participation of women in
conflict resolution and prevention.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/800) on women and peace and security.
We also welcome its important recommendations,
including concerning the adoption of national action
plans on women and peace and security, coupled
with the necessary resources, the monitoring of their
implementation, their localization and the appointment
of women as mediators and negotiators in all formal
peace processes.

The Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to
strengthening cooperation with the United Nations
and its agencies in supporting women and achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. In 2017, we
inaugurated the UN-Women office in the Kingdom
as part of our cooperation between UN-Women and
the Supreme Council for Women. The Kingdom of
Bahrain has sought to promote the leadership role
and participation of women in national structures and
legislation, pursuant to one of the priorities of the
national action plan adopted in 2005. That is part of the
reform approach launched by His Majesty King Hamad
bin Isa Al Khalifa of the Kingdom of Bahrain.

We have seen many achievements by Bahraini
women, including the election of Ms. Fawzia Zainal
as the First Speaker of Parliament. In 2017, Her Royal
Highness the King's wife launched the Princess
Sabeeka bint Ibrahim Al Khalifa International Award
for Women Empowerment. Her Royal Highness chairs
the Supreme Council for Women in Bahrain. This is
the first award of its kind in the world. It recognizes
institutional and individual efforts to promote women's
advancement and contribution to development. In
2014, the Kingdom of Bahrain established a gender
parity committee to ensure that women are given equal
opportunities in the labour market.

In line with our belief in the importance of
education for empowering women and girls, especially
those affected by conflict, the Kingdom of Bahrain has
established a number of schools in Syrian refugee camps
in Jordan, as well as in Gaza. The Kingdom of Bahrain
is committed to combating all practices that prevent the
empowerment of women, including human trafficking.
For the second year in a row, the Kingdom of Bahrain
has been ranked in the top category, according to the
United States Department of State report on trafficking
in persons, as one of the leading countries in combating
this illegal practice.

In conclusion, we stress the importance ofall efforts
aimed at promoting the empowerment of women and
their advancement in all areas as an effective partner
for maintaining international peace and security as
well as achieving prosperity.

