The President: I thank Ms. Miloud for her
briefing, and I thank all the briefers for their impressive
statements, which clearly underline why we are meeting
here today. The Security Council needs to stand with
the survivors.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.

"There is nothing I can do to forget all this." The
woman who uttered these words is sitting at this table:
Ms. Nadia Murad. All of us in this Chamber know her
story; all of us know what this sentence is about.

When we talk about sexual violence in conflict, we
are talking about her story. But we are also talking about
thousands of other stories that have never been told to
the world, stories hauntingly similar to Ms. Murad's
story, stories that could be told by many Rohingya
women in Myanmar or by girls in Syria, where sexual
violence is used as a weapon of war.

Almost 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), that is the grim reality of almost all
conflict. Resolution 1325 (2000) was a milestone,
but reality shows that its implementation is lagging
behind - we must do more. We must take three
important steps forward.

First, we must strengthen accountability. We must
strengthen the channels through which information on
non-compliance reaches the Security Council and its
sanctions committees. We want to ensure that sexual
violence has consequences, including through targeted
sanctions. Of course, we also need to ensure that crimes
are prosecuted, including at the national level. After all,
the failure to bring perpetrators of sexual violence in
conflict to justice fosters a deadly culture of impunity.

In Germany, the Prosecutor General began in 2014
to investigate war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham
in Iraq and Syria. Our legal system is working closely
on that with the relevant United Nations Special Envoy
and others should follow that example.

Secondly, we must place the victims - the
survivors of sexual violence - at the heart of our work.
That is why draft resolution S/2019/328, which we have
proposed, calls on all States Members of the United
Nations to support such survivors by providing better
access to justice, medical and psychological services,
as well as reintegration support, in other words by
enabling them to live their lives with dignity. Only
when we help victims to achieve justice, when we hear
their voices and let them testify, are we giving survivors
the chance to stop being victims.

Thirdly, we must focus on those who are not yet
getting enough attention, such as the boys and men
who have experienced sexual violence and the mothers
who give birth as a result of wartime rape and their
children. Those who have survived sexual violence
often remain victims long after the crimes have been
committed. They are stigmatized and cast out - and
that is horrible.

Yet the horror does not stop there. Sexual violence
not only affects the survivors but it also destroys the
society they live in. That makes the path to peace all
the more difficult. If you destroy women, you destroy
the family and eventually the entire village. That is how
Dr. Mukwege, who is also in the Chamber today, once
put it.

Dr. Mukwege saved the lives of tens of thousands
of women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, like Nadia
Murad. They share a bond in their inspiring fight for
justice. We have to do all we can to help them in that
fight - not only politically, through the draft resolution
that Germany is proposing, but also financially. That is
why we have earmarked €400,000 that we will use to
support their work and the survivors of sexual violence
in conflict.

There is nothing I can do to forget all this. Nadia
Murad's statement sent a chill down our spine. It sends
a clear and powerful message not to forget and to open
our eyes and use all the means we have to fight to
ensure her story is not repeated.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister of State for the
Commonwealth and the United Nations of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

