Ms. Juul (Norway): Eight years have passed
since the Security Council adopted resolution 1325
(2000) - eight years in which we have seen a growing
awareness in the Council of the need to include women
in peace processes and peacebuilding efforts. This is a
step in the right direction. But we are still far from a
full implementation, and numerous challenges remain.

Women's perspectives are still neglected in peace
negotiations. Women's particular concerns and needs
are overlooked or relegated to the bottom of the list of
priorities. Women and girls continue to be targets and
victims of injustice, assaults and sexual violence in
armed conflicts and in post-conflict situations. And the
issue of impunity for atrocities committed against
women and children remains largely unresolved.
Allegations of sexual misconduct by United
Nations peacekeepers are still heard despite the
Secretary-General's declared zero-tolerance policy.
That shameful situation must end. It is clear that the
zero-tolerance policy needs to be strengthened. It is
time to establish better internal controls, develop more
effective prevention measures and improve the
investigation and prosecution capacity.

Norway will once again encourage the Council to
take action on the Secretary-General's recommendation
on developing a monitoring mechanism to prevent and
redress violence against women in armed conflict. That
will also require efforts to improve United Nations
internal auditing in this area, as well as efforts to
ensure that troop-contributing countries commit to
prosecuting offenders. A recent Wilton Park conference
took a closer look at existing efforts to prevent the
targeting of women and children for sexual violence
and found that military peacekeepers need a clear
doctrine and guidelines for action for protecting
women and girls. Strengthening and clarifying
peacekeeping mandates with regard to sexual violence
must be given even higher priority both within the
United Nations system and at the national level.

Violence against civilians during and after armed
conflict, especially against women and children, makes
reconciliation, durable peace and development much
more difficult. Sexual violence against women and
girls as a method of warfare is extremely destructive
for the victims and for society as a whole.

The adoption in June of resolution 1820 (2008)
on women, peace and security and sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict was an important step. By
stressing that "sexual violence, when used as a tactic
of war in order to deliberately target civilians can
significantly exacerbate situations of armed conflict
and may impede the restoration of international peace"
(resolution 1820 (2008), para. 1), the Council showed
the world that it recognizes sexual violence as a
security problem that requires a systematic security
response. We are looking forward to the Secretary-
General's report on that issue in June 2009.

Norway strongly supports the united effort of 12
United Nations entities in creating the United Nations
Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict initiative,
which will seek to improve coordination and
accountability, support national efforts to prevent
sexual violence and respond effectively to the needs of
survivors.

The lack of security within and outside of refugee
camps is a major problem. Refugee and displaced
women and girls are particularly vulnerable to sexual
assault and sexual violence because of the conditions
of dependency that are often created in camps. The

distribution of food, the need to fetch water and fuel
outside the camp area and poor sanitary conditions are
all important factors. Thus, in our humanitarian efforts,
Norway aims to ensure that women and men alike take
part in all levels of the planning, organization and
general management of refugee camps. Women must
be systematically registered and treated as individuals
rather than solely as members of a man's family, and
camps should be organized so that single women and
single men are housed in separate areas.

The main responsibility for implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) remains with individual
Member States. The development of national action
plans is a good way of initiating strategic actions,
identifying priorities and resources, and determining
responsibilities and time frames for monitoring
implementation efforts. Norway adopted a national
action plan in 2006 that has proven to be an efficient
tool in the process of implementing the resolution. We
are pleased to note that the action plan has inspired
similar processes among our partners and we are
particularly encouraged to see women taking their
rightful place in the peace processes in the Sudan and
Nepal. We look forward to continuing to work with all
Council members and other partners to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
women's equal participation in peacebuilding.

