Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Iwould
like to thank France for organizing today's debate on an
issue on which, as has already been said, much remains
to be done. We also grateful for the participation of and
statements by Chef de Cabinet Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti; Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women; Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas, of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security;
and Ms. Michaelle Jean, Secretary General of the
International Organization of La Francophonie.

The women and peace and security agenda will
require our persistent attention if it is to achieve real
and tangible progress. In that regard, we would like to
highlight the periodic work of the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security, and we align ourselves
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Canada on its behalf. We would also like to highlight
the efforts of the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, which helps to maintain a
systematic approach to the subject on the Security
Council's agenda. We particularly appreciate the
momentum generated by the Secretary-General for the
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

Uruguay welcomes other initiatives that are
helping to achieve the agenda's objectives, such as that
of Spain in establishing a network of national focal
points for women and peace and security, as well as
the efforts of the team of experts from the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict to strengthen national
capacities for investigating and prosecuting crimes and
protecting victims and witnesses. Gender equality and
the empowerment of women are essential conditions for
conflict prevention and peacekeeping and key factors
in achieving the goals set by the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

Let us be clear. In Uruguay, when we talk about the
empowerment of women, we are talking about creating
and ensuring the conditions that women need to exercise
their most basic rights to full, individual freedom,
without the artificial constraints that relegate them to
second-class status. That means the freedom to choose
their way of life; to choose how, where and with whom
to live their life; and to make decisions for themselves
and by themselves on their education, their work and
their bodies. In short, we are talking about the freedom
to be masters of their own destiny. An empowered
woman is a vital instrument for transforming our
societies' egalitarian development.

It is the responsibility of States to safeguard
women's rights and ensure gender equality, as well
as the inclusion and non-discriminatory treatment
of women regardless of race, religion, age, sexual
orientation, gender identity or any other status.
However, it is also the responsibility of organized civil
society to be vigilant about their countries' conduct in
that regard. States should also work to improve women's
participation in mediating, preventing and resolving
conflicts, as outlined in resolution 1325 (2000). They
have a proven ability to approach, negotiate, understand
and empathize in such situations.

Uruguay can attest to all of that. The increase in
the numbers of female personnel in the peacekeeping
operations in which our country participates, which
today is still only a modest 7 per cent of the total, has
nevertheless been an enriching element for the quality
of the contingent and the results obtained. In particular,
in missions such as the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we can attest to the effective role that women
have played in building trust in local communities
for all the reasons I just mentioned, and even more
so among those who have been victims of any kind of
sexual violence.

Regrettably, the horrors of gender-based sexual
violence continue to constitute one of the most
devastating effects of armed conflict around the world.
We must take effective measures to eradicate that
scourge, but we must also put an end to impunity and
restore the dignity of the victims of such crimes. In that
regard, we have to rethink our collective approach in
order to focus on the victims and survivors, who should
receive comprehensive assistance that can ensure that
they are able to fully recover from such violations and
reintegrate into their societies.

States should maximize their efforts on both
the national and international levels to ensure that
the perpetrators of these crimes are prosecuted. The
International Criminal Court plays a key role in that
regard by judging crimes that have been recognized
by the Rome Statute as war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including those that may constitute crimes
of genocide. Consequently, it is the responsibility of
the Security Council to ensure that crimes of sexual
violence are referred to the Court and that such cases
are continuously monitored.

Similarly, we must ensure that United Nations
peacekeepers are not part of the problem. In that
connection, we welcome recent initiatives by the
Secretary-General such as the proposal of a voluntary
pact with troop-contributing countries against sexual
exploitation and abuse, to which Uruguay has adhered;
the establishment of a women's leadership circle, of
which Uruguay is honoured to be a member; and the
appointment of an advocate for the rights of victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse.

Uruguay stresses the importance of carefully
educating personnel involved in peace missions in
relation to issues of gender and sexual violence in
conflicts. In the specific case of my country, prior to
deployment, all personnel must undergo a training
course on human rights, international humanitarian
law, gender issues, child protection and sexual abuse
and exploitation, as well as sign a statement in which
they agree to comply with the standards of conduct.

The gender perspective must be part of the entire
peacekeeping planning process, as well as at the time
of review and when it comes to reducing the number
of deployed personnel. On this point, the recent cuts
to the gender and human rights components of various
mandates of certain peace missions are of concern.

We welcome the fact that, since 2000, the agenda
on women and peace and security has acquired
considerable normative momentum. We also highlight
the work done by the bodies established under various
human rights instruments with regard to the agenda in
their oversight role. I would like to reiterate the need
to join forces in order to implement transformative
and large-scale initiatives that will ensure that issues
related to the women and peace and security agenda
are systemically integrated in approaches to prevention
and peacekeeping.

Uruguay reaffirms its commitment to the agenda
on women and peace and security and to continue
working with the United Nations and all Member States
for its full and effective implementation.

