Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for having
organized this thematic debate on women and peace
and security: sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. We believe that today's discussions, like the
previous debate, in October 2007 (see S/PV.5766), will
be a useful contribution to the efforts to focus on the
main issues contained in resolution 1325 (2000).

Kazakhstan attaches great importance to
resolution 1325 (2000), which draws the attention of
the international community to the crucial issue of the
detrimental impact of armed conflict on women and
girls and the importance of incorporating a gender
perspective into peacekeeping operations.

My delegation once again reaffirms its
commitment to the zero-tolerance policy for sexual
violence against women and girls as a tool of warfare.

Since the adoption of the resolution, the Security
Council has organized regular reviews to assess its
implementation. Despite some progress, that
implementation is still slow and uneven. As has already
been pointed out by other delegations, we too agree
that women's involvement in decision-making with
regard to security issues and the peacebuilding process
has a positive effect on the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and on post-conflict rehabilitation. Having
said that, my delegation fully commends the efforts
aimed at increasing women's involvement in the
decision-making process in the areas of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

However, as the most vulnerable group of
civilians due to their gender and social status, women
and girls continue to be the main victims of sexual
assault during conflicts. The situation is further
exacerbated as a result of the fact that gross violations
against women and girls in zones of armed conflict are
often concealed. Because they are stigmatized by local
communities, victims usually tend to disguise
information about abuse out of fear for their lives and
families. There is therefore insufficient evidence to
make the case against perpetrators.

In that regard, we would like to underscore the
importance of developing victim protection systems
similar to existing programmes for witness protection;
strengthening legislation on the responsibility of
perpetrators for crimes against women and girls in
conflict zones; and working with local communities to
disseminate information on abhorrent crimes, including
sexual violence in zones of armed conflict, in order to
raise local awareness and knowledge about the legal
consequences of crimes.

08-3908]
Recognizing the fact that the consequences of
violence against women and girls in conflict zones has
a serious impact on physical and mental health and are
of a sensitive nature, my delegation would strongly like
to recommend a more vigorous expansion of the role
and contribution of women in field-based operations,
especially among humanitarian personnel, including
medical staff.

We must nevertheless recognize that
understanding about the magnitude of the problem of
security and the protection of women and girls in
conflict zones has been growing thanks to resolution
1325 (2000). In that regard, we would like to express
our appreciation for the Secretary-General's report
(S/2007/567) on women and peace and security, as well
as the efforts of the United Nations system to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels.
Addressing sexual violations in armed conflict is not
the responsibility of a given country or region alone,
but a humanitarian imperative for every stakeholder.
The side to a conflict that encourages the violence must
be strongly condemned.

In conclusion, I would like to express the hope
that the full and successful implementation of the
resolution by all Member States will help to
significantly increase protection for women's and girls'
rights and dignity in zones of armed conflict, as well as
to eliminate such crimes, including sexual abuses.

