Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me at the outset thank
India for having organized today's open debate, which
is important. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson, Ms. Bachelet, Mr. Ladsous and Ms. Bineta
Diop for their insightful briefings. Germany aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union (EU).

At the outset, let me stress that my country
unreservedly welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/732) and especially his analysis
using the set of indicators developed by the United
Nations. We also commend the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) for its work in leading the mainstreaming
efforts within the United Nations system. We encourage
UN-Women to continue to cooperate closely with other
United Nations entities.

While the need to involve women in peace processes
has been extensively addressed, progress is needed in
all spheres of society in order to strengthen the potential
of women as agents of change. So, we again need to
ask ourselves: What more can the Security Council, the
United Nations and Member States do to close the gap
between the normative framework and concrete action?

Let me make five points here. First, today's debate
and the presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/23) that
was adopted on 31 October focus explicitly, for the first
time, on the important role of women's civil society
organizations. We very much welcome that focus, as
the inclusion of women and women's organizations is
not a benevolent act, but rather a key requirement of
any sustainable peace.
Secondly, the protection of women in armed conflict
from all forms of violence, especially sexual violence,
is crucial. But we must also protect those who fight for
women's rights. They deserve our unreserved backing.
Having met with several women's organizations from
different parts of the world, I know that human rights
defenders often face severe risks in carrying out their
work.

Thirdly, women and women's organizations
can also play a crucial role in the implementation
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
security sector reform mechanisms. They can also
occupy a crucial role in political and constitutional
reform and transitional justice efforts. To enable them
to play that role, women's organizations need to receive
adequate support, including financial support.

Fourthly, Germany regularly supports women's
organizations and human rights defenders financially
and logistically. To name but a few examples: we have
organized regional conferences in Tunisia and Argentina
in 2011, and we will be sponsoring a conference in
Panama on gender training, the prevention of sexual
violence and providing response tools and unhindered
access to justice. Germany has also committed itself to
the EU charter of the European Shelter Cities Initiative
to increase the protection of human rights defenders.
Furthermore, I am happy to announce that Germany is
working on a national action plan to further enhance
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Lastly, the Security Council could do even more
itself to systematically integrate women and peace
and security issues into its daily work, including when
mandating or renewing United Nations missions.
Envoys and special representatives should address those
issues in their briefings to the Council. This should
also include considerations on how to sustain gains
made in the protection and advancement of women's
rights during United Nations mission drawdowns and
transitions.

