Mr. Ozawa (Japan): Thank you very much
Mr. President for providing us with an opportunity to
make a few comments on a subject to which we attach
great importance - strengthening the United Nations
response to gender-based violence in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

The manner in which women are often obliged to
live during armed conflict is indeed a moral outrage.
They are usually neither the initiators of conflict nor
the wagers of war, and yet their gender is often
specifically targeted. That situation should in no way
be tolerated. However, we also need to be sober
enough to recognize that the international community
can do much more to address the problem in post-
conflict situations rather than during the conflict.

The post-conflict situation opens up real
opportunities to remove threats to women's dignity.
Moreover, Japan is convinced that empowering women
is one of the most effective means for peace-building
in post conflict situations. Successful peace-building
will lead to the prevention of the recurrence of conflict,
thus reducing the risk of gender-based violence
spreading again. As resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirmed,
women themselves have an important role to play in
the prevention of conflict, as they are known to play
critical roles in building the capacity of communities to
prevent new or recurrent violence.

The recognition that women play important roles
in peace-building is now widely shared. What we must
do is to follow up that recognition with action on the
ground to empower women in post-conflict situations.
Women need assistance in order for them to play larger
roles in their communities and to be integrated into the
mainstream peace-building and reconstruction
processes.

In that regard, my delegation wishes again to
refer to the concept of human security, which we
believe is, in essence, the protection and empowerment

of ordinary individuals. The promotion of human
security is now one of the major pillars of Japan's
foreign policy. In order to ensure that more actions are
taken in the field to enhance human security, Japan
took the initiative to establish the United Nations Trust
Fund for Human Security. Allow me to cite a few
examples where United Nations funds, programmes
and specialized agencies are utilizing that Fund for the
purpose of empowering women in post-conflict
situations. The United Nations Population Fund is
conducting an approximately $1 million project on
emergency reproductive health services in Eritrea. The
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) is administering an approximately
$1 million project to promote reintegration of
internally displaced persons and refugee women in
community building in Afghanistan. In Rwanda,
UNIFEM. is conducting a $1.3 million project on
enhancing human security through gender equality in
the context of HIV/AIDS.

In the four years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), there has been a positive shift in
international understanding of the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls, as well as of the
importance of their participation in all areas related to
peace and security. Owing to the resolution, the
importance of partnership between men and women in
the peace-building and reconstruction process now
enjoys wider recognition, and, indeed, the international
community has made significant strides in
implementing the resolution. As the Secretary-
General's report notes, however, the real test of the
adequacy of those efforts is measured by their impact
on the ground.

Japan is committed to working actively in this
area, and building on the lessons learned, so that we
are more effective in bringing about more real changes
on the ground.

