Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): My delegation
welcomes this opportunity to participate in this open
debate on women and peace and security and wishes to
express our appreciation to the delegation of the United
States for organizing the debate. We also commend the
President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-
General, the Deputy Secretary-General, His Excellency
the Liberian Minister for Foreign Affairs and Major-
General Cammaert for their briefings.

Throughout history, gender-based violence, in
particular violence against women, has a component of
armed conflict. In Rwanda, the 1994 genocide was
marked by horrific forms of violence, particularly
against girls and women. An estimated 500,000 girls
and women were victims of rape by the Interahamwe,
and up to two thirds of those victims were also infected
with HIV by perpetrators carrying the virus. It is now
evident that rape was part of the genocidal plan and
part of the systematic degradation of women and of
girls. This plan was then exported by members of the
former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe across our borders into the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and continues to be
exacted by the ex-FAR/Interahamwe, under its new
denomination the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda, the Rally for Unity and Democracy
(RUD-Urunana) and other militias on the women and
girls of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Fourteen years on, survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda continue to live with the effects of that legacy.

Therefore, addressing the specific protection
needs of women in armed conflict remains a critical
matter for the United Nations system. My delegation
therefore reiterates its support for the continued
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security and the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa.

It is within that context that my Government has
set out to elaborate a national policy on gender-based
violence and violence against women. The
development of that policy is situated within a
national, regional and international context and is
linked to peacebuilding and economic development and
growth. Article II of the Rwanda genocide law
stipulates that gender-based violence, violence against
women and sexual violence must be dealt with in the
first category under article I, as a crime of genocide or
crime against humanity, punishable under article 95 of
the penal code with a maximum term of life
imprisonment.

Rwanda, as one of the major troop-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
has a vested interest in ensuring the protection of
women in situations of armed conflict. Gender-based
violence and violence against women are therefore
considered by the Rwanda Defence Forces as a key
component of the security threat. In that respect, the
gender desk at Rwanda Defence Forces headquarters
devises training programmes, with the support of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), to raise awareness of gender-based
violence and violence against women in the armed
forces. Awareness and training on responding to
gender-based violence and violence against women has
now been mainstreamed into the curricula of all
Rwanda's military schools and training institutions and
is integral to the preparation of all Rwanda Defence
Forces battalions preparing for peace missions abroad.
The leadership of the Rwanda Defence Forces has also
undertaken the fight against gender-based violence and
violence against women as a command responsibility.

My delegation therefore calls upon the United
Nations system to take concerted action on addressing
the plight of women in armed conflict through
enforcing resolution 1325 (2000), rejecting impunity
through support to and strengthening of national
jurisdictions and the provision of support to victims of
sexual violence.

We also strongly believe that in order for the
United Nations system to respond in a more
coordinated, coherent and effective manner, urgent
attention needs to be placed on strengthening the
United Nations system's work on gender.

