Mr. Morejon (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for convening
this important meeting to address a critical item on the
international agenda.

Ecuador believes that the United Nations has a
fundamental role to play in combating all forms of
discrimination and violence against women. My
country is therefore firmly resolved to continue to
support and strengthen that work, and calls on the
international community to pool its efforts to that end.
Ecuador has demonstrated its commitment by ratifying
all relevant international treaties and by co-sponsoring
various resolutions of the General Assembly on this
important and sensitive question.

The Security Council has made a significant
contribution in its own area of competence by adopting
a number of resolutions on the protection of civilians,
in particular children and women, in armed conflict,
including resolution 1325 (2000), which refers to
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. On 19
June 2008, the Council also adopted resolution 1820
(2008) stressing the important role of women in
conflict prevention and resolution and peacekeeping, as
well as the need to include the gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations, and condemning all forms of
gender-based violence, in particular rape and sexual
violence.

Ecuador has taken due note of the first report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/362) pursuant to
resolution 1820 (2008). The report highlights the
numerous efforts of States to eradicate that scourge.
My country believes that, notwithstanding the
strenuous efforts of the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, it is urgent to establish greater
cooperation among the main organs of the United
Nations, taking into account the fact that the General
Assembly is the universal entity responsible for
establishing the normative framework that guides the
decisions of all States. Moreover, my delegation
believes that the General Assembly should consider the
subject of sexual violence, including when it is
perpetrated during armed conflict, systematically and
regularly, as it has done during previous sessions with

the consensus adoption of a number of resolutions on
working to eliminate rape and other forms of sexual
violence in all their manifestations.

Ecuador believes that a financially and
operationally strengthened gender entity would help
eradicate the scourge. We call upon States to continue
to pursue the goals of United Nations system-wide
coherence, which would enhance the Organization's
effectiveness and efficiency in the field.

A topic as sensitive as the one we are discussing
today, which should be a matter of concern for all
countries, deserves broad and systematic consideration
by the entire membership. The international
community should join its forces to establish
mechanisms that would provide comprehensive
assistance to victims of this scourge and coordinate
efforts to punish perpetrators.

I wish in conclusion to reaffirm the determination
of the Government and the people of Ecuador to
continue to work together with the rest of the
international community to eradicate all forms of
violence against women and girls, in particular sexual
violence, in every country and every region of our
planet.

