Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
My delegation first would like to thank Nigeria for
convening this debate and for providing Belgium with
an opportunity to take part in it. Combating sexual
violence in conflict is indeed a priority for Belgium.
My country would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/18l) and Ms. Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her unfailing commitment to
the cause.

My delegation fully supports the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. I would therefore
like to focus my statement on some points that are of
particular importance for Belgium.

First and foremost, combating impunity is a
priority for my country. Security Council resolution
2106 (2013), adopted last year, called for the pursuit
of efforts in combating the impunity of perpetrators
of sexual violence in conflict. Belgium is particularly
concerned about sexual violence committed by
members of the police, the army and some armed
groups, in particular in Afghanistan and in Cote
d'Ivoire. The climate of impunity, characterized by a
lack of disciplinary procedures, sanctions and criminal
prosecution, significantly contributes to creating a
high-risk environment for women and girls.

Belgium would also like to underscore the
importance of ensuring access to effective justice for
victims of sexual violence. My country is seriously
concerned by the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which is one of the three target countries
of the national Belgian action plan called "Women,
peace and security". There is a great gulf between
the legislative framework and implementing that
framework. Numerous victims have limited access to
justice, in particular because ofa lack ofresources to file
a law suit and to get legal aid. Developing appropriate
mechanisms to assist victims and to facilitate access to
justice is crucial. Implementing a functioning judicial
system is also needed in the Central African Republic,
where the victims of sexual violence are very vulnerable
to being stigmatized and to reprisals.

Furthermore, Belgium shares the Secretary-
General's concerns regarding the link between sexual
violence and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of ex-combattant programmes and
security sector reform (SSR) programmes. There is a
real need to pay particular and additional attention to
the gender dimension when planning, training for and
developing DDR and SSR programmes.

Belgium would also like to state its concerns about
the impact of conflicts on the rights of the child, in
particular regarding forced marriages, prostitution
and the exploitation of girls. The presence of armed
groups increases the rate of forced and early marriages
in a number of countries - for example, Syria
and Yemen - where conflict has had devastating
consequences for the poorest and most vulnerable girls.

Belgium would like to underscore, as the Secretary-
General did, that the end of a conflict does not mean an
end of sexual violence. Post-conflict situations create
high-risk environments. That must be borne in mind in
order to have a comprehensive, consistent approach to
combating sexual violence. Along those lines, Belgium
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation
regarding including the prevention of sexual violence
in all peace and cease-fire agreements. Furthermore,
as an ardent champion of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, Belgium pays particular
importance to the participation of women in all stages
of the peace process. Women must have the possibility
to decide their own fate and to contribute to preventing
and resolving conflicts as well as to building peace.

