Mr. Emvula (Namibia): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your country's assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of October. Furthermore, I
wish to thank you for organizing this very important
debate affording the wider United Nations membership
an opportunity to contribute to the very important
discussion on women, the rule of law and transitional
justice. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of UN Women and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their kind
introductory remarks. I am also grateful for the concept
note (S/2013/587, annex) that you have circulated, Sir,
which we believe will guide our deliberations to a
successful conclusion.

From the outset, Namibia has recognized the
important role ofwomen in peacebuilding, as enunciated
in resolution 1325 (2000), of October 2000, which my
delegation, together with many others, successfully
negotiated during our presidency of the Security
Council. Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
we have been pleased that the United Nations has adopted
specific policy directives to achieve gender equality in
peacekeeping operations. Due to their vulnerability,
women in many conflicts situations around the world
continue to face intolerable hardship, as they become
targets of sexual Violence. In that context, Namibia
welcomes and supports the adoption of the recent Arms
Trade Treaty, as it is the first international instrument
that includes a gender criterion in the context of arms
transfers, thereby identifying women as vulnerable
targets in conflict situations.

The role of women in conflict prevention and post-
conflict peacebuilding is of great importance. Namibia
therefore fully supports the inclusion of women in
security systems such as armed forces, police and
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
in support of various United Nations resolutions that
recognize that important role.

Namibia is proud to be among the troop-
contributing countries that have successfully complied
with resolution 1888 (2009), which urges Member States
to deploy greater numbers of female military and police
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping missions. As
we speak, a group of police women from Namibia is on
its way to Darfur.

We recognize the important role of
non-governmental organizations such as Justice
Rapid Response in training Member State officials
as investigators of gender-based violence and rapidly
deploying them to conflict areas. Namibia will
continue to support such initiatives, as they can go a
long way in assisting the international community in
investigating such horrible crimes, which specifically
target women and children. We therefore welcome the
partnership between Justice Rapid Response and UN
Women in organizing the upcoming training course
for investigators of sexual-based violence to be held in
Bogota in January 2014.

We would like to draw the Council's attention to
the recent resolution adopted by the Human Rights
Council on the elimination of violence against women
that encourages the use of mechanisms such as the
UN Women/Justice Rapid Response joint roster of
international investigators of sexual and gender-
based crimes in its efforts to promptly make available
the relevant expertise to investigate mass rapes and
systematic violence.

There is a need to combat impunity and bring
the perpetrators of sexual Violence to justice. Sexual
violence must be prosecuted at both the national and
international levels. However, we have noticed with
great concern that sexual violence is underreported
at both the national level and in conflict situations.
Therefore, there is a need to support the strengthening
of judicial systems and the destigmatization of sexual
violence for the victims so they may access justice
without being excluded.

At the international level, we urge States to
fully comply with international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and the International
Criminal Court mechanisms, which need to be
strengthened.

In conclusion, the legacy of conf lict-related violence
is endured long after peace agreements have been
concluded. Women continue to be targets of Violence as
insecurity continues in the absence of effective justice
systems that facilitate large-scale impunity. Therefore,
the involvement of women in peace processes and the
establishment of the rule of law are the foundation for
sustainable and durable peace. We therefore commend
the continuous engagement of the Council in promoting
the role of women in peacebuilding.

