Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I commend the
Bolivian presidency for having convened this debate
on sustaining peace through women's political and
economic empowerment. I express warm appreciation
to the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, for
his astute recommendations, as well as to Under-
Secretary-General Mlambo-Ngcuka and UN-Women
for their leadership and groundbreaking work. We
would particularly like to thank the women Ministers
of Sweden and the Netherlands, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom and civil society
representative Randa Atallah for their moving and
insightful statements and updates. We also welcome
and appreciate the presence of civil society colleagues
in the Chamber.

I take this opportunity to join the Bolivian
presidency in congratulating most sincerely our
Ethiopian sisters and brothers on electing the famous
diplomat Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde as President of the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. It is very
symbolic that the country has elected its first female
President today, when on this global platform we are
discussing the empowerment of women and its role
in peace and security. As a member observer of the
African Union, we support and associate ourselves with
the statement of C6te d'Ivoire to be delivered today on
behalf of the African troika.

We join other speakers in calling for an increased
use of the women and peace and security agenda as an
important tool for conflict prevention and resolution
and for transformative change across the three pillars
of the United Nations. There is a need to bridge the gap
between words and deeds so as to effectively implement
the robust women and peace and security agenda and
to decisively mobilize the newly established United
Nations mechanisms, such as the Council's Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security
and the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund.
Equally critical are the Women, Peace and Security
National Focal Points Network and the Peacebuilding
Commission's gender strategy, which serve as platforms
for sharing best practices and lessons learned.

Furthermore, we must support the Secretary-
General's reforms focused on placing gender at the
centre of conflict prevention and resolution efforts.
Gender parity must feature at the highest levels
across the United Nations and across his peace and
security architecture reform. Efficiency should be
enhanced through increased collaboration between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UN-
Women in the field and at Headquarters. We must
support the United Nations initiative to double the
number of women in military and police contingents
by 2020. It is critical to build capacity among women
through South-South, North-South and triangular
cooperation and to empower them to be engaged in
early warning, mediation, peace negotiations, peace
agreements and confidence-building measures.

True progress on women's empowerment across
the globe requires a complete social transformation,
involving the State, communities, the judiciary and
educational systems. It is evident that the lack of
access to quality and inclusive education, especially in
rural areas, is the main obstacle to achieving women's
empowerment. We welcome the intention of the European
Union to launch a pilot project worth €2 million to
conduct educational programmes for Afghan women, in
line with Afghanistan's National Priority Programmes,
at institutions of higher education in Kazakhstan and
Uzbekistan. We encourage other donor countries to
allocate a greater number of scholarships for women
and girls from conflict-affected countries.

Efforts also must be made to strengthen women's
economic security and to improve their access to
markets, bilateral trade diplomacy and exchange
programmes. We therefore need public-private
partnerships to enhance entrepreneurship and access
to technology. We call on all stakeholders to promote
women's economic empowerment in cooperation with
the private sector, to provide access to regional and
global markets and to ensure their inclusion in the
supply chains of multinational enterprises.

It is clear that the women and peace and security
agenda needs adequate and sustainable financing,
especially in countries affected by conflict, in order
to fully implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Secretary-General's new agenda
forpeace and to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping
missions have sufficient gender expertise, authority
and capacity. The funding gap in the United Nations
system should be bridged through more streamlined
and better-coordinated strategies, in collaboration with
other partners.

In addition, grass-roots communities, religious
leaders and civil society must be encouraged to improve
women's access to a country's political and religious
leadership and to participation in peace processes.
Member States, in turn, must be encouraged to engage
with civil society organizations, including women's
and youth groups, and work towards enhanced data
collection with upgraded timely gender analyses and
desegregated data to monitor commitments.

The women and peace and security global agenda
will be effective only when each Member State and
region enacts national legislation, in accordance with
international norms, with the right policies and legal
and institutional environment to foster gender equality.

Kazakhstan is working to achieve the highest world
standards in gender policy and to strengthen the role
of women in the sociopolitical life of the country. Our
country integrates all four pillars of the women and
peace and security agenda in its national legislation
by formulating new strong pro-women policies to
achieve gender parity in decision-making at all levels.
For instance, women currently occupy 50 per cent of
the positions in the Foreign Ministry and other public
institutions in my country. We also provide training on
gender equality for our armed and security forces and
in connection with women's deployment to the United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

National efforts must be reinforced by
commitments at the regional level and strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In that context, we commend regional
structures for implementing the women and peace
and security agenda in their respective regions. A fine
example is the African Union, with its progressive
gender mainstreaming within the African Peace and
Security Architecture, as well as the efforts of the
African Women Leaders Network, which was launched
last year.

On its part, Kazakhstan is focusing at the regional
level on Afghanistan with a multidimensional approach
to conflict prevention and resolution, recovery,
reintegration and humanitarian assistance. My country,
in cooperation with Japan and the United Nations
Development Programme, has been implementing a
project for gender equality in Afghanistan, including
providing policy support and capacity development. We
are also financing a $50 million programme to educate
Afghan youth in our universities. In addition, last
September, in cooperation with the European Union,
Kazakhstan organized in Astana a regional conference
on empowering women in Afghanistan.

To conclude, Kazakhstan pledges its unfailing
support to the women and peace and security agenda
and reaffirms that women can be powerful participants
in any realm - from the corner store to activists, and
from the seats of Parliament to the peace table.

