Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I wish to express my
appreciation, Mr. President, for the United Kingdom's
leadership and for Foreign Secretary Hague's own
personal drive to bring more serious and systematic
international focus to the issue of the prevention of
sexual violence. I thank also the Secretary-General and
Special Representative Bangura for their determined
commitment, as well as Ms. Adong Anywar and all
her colleagues for their inspirational work in the
field, so often in the face of the corrosive Violence of
indifference, and Ms. Angelina Jolie for her uninhibited
advocacy and reminder to the Council that so many
millions of people rely on us.

We know that sexual violence is both a tactic and
a consequence of conflict. It can prolong and deepen
conflict. Its prevention is intrinsic to the protection
of civilians in conflict, a primordial concern of the
Council, and to rebuilding societies devastated by
conflict. As successive resolutions of the Council make
plain, sexual violence goes to the heart of the Council's
mandate in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Despite the Council's clear stance against sexual
Violence in conflict, we also know about the terrible
number of women and girls, men and boys, who
continue to be affected by it every day. Sexual violence
is not just a grave concern, it is even endemic in many
current situations on the Council's daily agenda: the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mali, Afghanistan, Somalia, the Sudan,
South Sudan and Syria. In the face of such violence,
the international community's strong expectation - it
shouldbetheirdemand-isthatthe Councilwill domore.
The Council's open debate on 17 April (see S/PV.6948)
addressed many of the most compelling issues that we
should be dealing with. Today's resolution 2106 (2013)
is a further step towards ensuring that sexual violence
is addressed across the breadth of our work, but in
a very practical, programmatic way. That includes
the consistent application of targeted sanctions and
eliciting and monitoring commitments from all parties
to conflict.
Today I want to focus on the current culture of
impunity. Changing that to one of accountability
is fundamental to deterrence and prevention. We
have recognized that sexual violence can constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity; we have
recognized that States have an obligation to investigate
and prosecute such crimes; and we have recognized that
ending impunity is a critical part of achieving lasting
peace. But the fact remains that we have seen only a
tiny number of perpetrators brought to justice. That
sends the dangerous message that sexual violence is
still tolerated. As Special Representative Bangura said
this morning, "Today it is still largely cost-free to rape
a woman, child or man in conflict".

States have the primary obligation to investigate
and prosecute crimes of sexual violence. That requires
that they criminalize each recognized crime - rape,
sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy,
enforced sterilization and other forms of sexual violence
of comparable gravity. It is not sufficient to just have
those crimes on the books. Female victims of sexual
Violence must be provided with equal access to justice,
which requires substantive rights to be recognized and
women and girls to be encouraged to exercise those
rights. Measures must be adopted to encourage victims
and witnesses to testify against perpetrators and to
protect those who do so.

National capacity must be developed to translate
substantive laws into successful investigations and
prosecutions. In that context, we commend the work
being done by the United Nations Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
United Kingdom's own team of experts, Justice Rapid
Response and the Institute for International Criminal
Investigations, among others. The Australian Civilian
Corps is strengthening its own gender-based violence
expertise to complement these efforts.

Obviously, even the most sophisticated criminal
justice systems will be of little use if the political will
to investigate and prosecute perpetrators is lacking.
National authorities must fight stigmas that impede
the reporting of incidents of sexual violence to law
enforcement authorities. Investigators must be trained
to look for evidence of crimes of sexual violence and to
gather the evidence necessary to sustain prosecutions.
Crimes of sexual violence, like other serious
international crimes, must be excluded from amnesty
provisions. States should also consider complementary
processes, such as truth and reconciliation commissions,
to supplement criminal accountability processes.
Where national jurisdictions are unable or unwilling to
prosecute crimes of sexual violence, the Council should
consider International Criminal Court (ICC) referral,
and ensure that the Council supports subsequent ICC
activities. We commend the ICC on its leadership in
seeking to ensure that crimes of sexual violence are not
neglected in the fight against impunity.

In conclusion, we have focused today on the victims
of sexual violence, who are overwhelmingly female.
But women are not just victims. They are critical
agents in conflict prevention, resolution, rebuilding
and reconciliation. Just as we must ensure women's full
and effective participation in efforts to address sexual
violence through both prevention and protection, we
must also to utilize their decisive power to bring about
peace. That is fundamental to the Council's work

