Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
1 thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
debate, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura,
for her important contributions.

Spain fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. The full version
of my statement will be circulated in the Chamber, but
I should like to share what I believe to be its most vital
elements.

Conflict-related sexual violence is a violation of
human rights and possibly one of the most abhorrent.
My country therefore firmly supports the idea of
an optional protocol that would help to mitigate and
document violations of human rights. We believe that
if we are to effectively combat conflict-related sexual
violence, we need the cooperation of regional and
subregional organizations. Therefore, we particularly
welcome the appointment by the African Union of
Ms. Bineta Diop to help in addressing conflict-related
sexual violence. Spain has also cooperated with the
African Union in such difficult areas as providing
gender advisers in Guinea Bissau, Mali and Somalia.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2014/181) is
magnificent and lengthy. We have read it extremely
carefully. I should like to emphasize six elements that I
believe to be of vital importance.

First is the importance of prevention, as we all
know. Secondly, in post-conflict situations, which
are perhaps the most serious and most traumatic of
situations, we need to incorporate a specific provision
for care for victims. Thirdly, we must never forget the
victims themselves, whose situation is truly tragic and
alarming. Fourthly, we must keep in mind in particular
victims from vulnerable sectors, such as indigenous
groups or the disabled. Fifthly, it is important to ensure
appropriate training for armed forces because they
can play a definitive role in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Lastly, we need to combat helplessness.

I have two positive concluding remarks to make.
First, we have made progress and have certainly done so
because of the work of Ms. Bangura's Office. Secondly,
we must duly exploit the current momentum. I should
also like to comment on remarks made by Ms. Bangura
and by the Ambassador of Malaysia.

Ms. Bangura said this morning that we need to
move from resolution to solution. I think we have a
sufficiently broad normative corpus of resolutions and
decisions that enable us, legally speaking, to address
this very tragic phenomenon. The Ambassador of
Malaysia said something that I wholeheartedly endorse,
to the effect that we must have zero tolerance for sexual
violence in conflict, which, I repeat, is one of the most
heinous and tragic violations of human rights.

