Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): Madam
President, my delegation welcomes your presiding over
our work as the Security Council holds its annual
thematic debate on women and peace and security. We
commend your initiative in organizing it.
We thank the Secretary-General, Under-
Secretary-General Bachelet, Ambassador Lazarous
Kapambwe of the Economic and Social Council, and
Ms. Nemat for their briefings. We welcome the
presence of Ms. Chowdhary, of the Parliament of India.

As members know, two years ago Gabon
underwent a political transition that was outstandingly
led by two women, one the President of the Senate and
the other the President of the Constitutional Court.
When Ali Bongo Ondimba, President of the Gabonese
Republic, addressed the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly, he recalled the high priority Gabon
gives to the effective participation of women in
mediation and conflict prevention (see A/66/PV.16).

A few weeks ago, we welcomed the awarding of
the Nobel Peace Prize to three women: Mrs. Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf, President of Liberia, Ms. Leymah
Gbowee, Liberian activist, and Ms. Tawakkul Karman,
Yemeni activist. This year, those three women clearly
embody the very issue we are discussing.

The Security Council reached a consensus more
than a decade ago in recognizing, through the adoption
on 31 October 2000 of resolution 1325 (2000), the
decisive role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding. In its
presidential statement S/PRST/2001/3l, the Council
made commitments on this issue. In doing so, it
established that without the effective participation of
women in peace processes, our efforts to maintain
international peace and security would always be
incomplete and would yield diminished results.

In the matter under discussion, three areas seem
to us essential for coherent and fruitful action. First, we
must strengthen our normative framework at the
international, regional and national levels. Secondly,
we must work to strengthen capacities, especially
through peacekeeping missions and in the post-conflict
peacebuilding and reconstruction phase. Finally, we
must establish a stronger link between the protection of
women and children and the prevention of armed
conflict by focusing on the root causes of those
conflicts.

We note that much progress has been made in
developing a normative framework to strengthen the
action of the international community. Resolution 1325
(2000) is the foundation of that structure. That
foundation has expanded and now forms a body with
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and
1960 (2010). Together, those resolutions offer the
Council and the international community as a whole a
vast body of values and principles that can guide our
action in matters of participation, protection, capacity-
building and the fight against impunity, but also in the
rehabilitation and reintegration of women in society in
the context of peacebuilding.

We welcome the fact that a majority of Security
Council resolutions focus particular attention on the
question of women's effective participation. That
fortunate trend should be pursued so that it becomes an
essential part of the work of the Council and of the
United Nations.

In light of the persistent realities in conflict
situations, especially the continuing violence against
women, we need a renewed commitment on the part of
all actors, first and foremost States, but also regional
governmental institutions and civil society
organizations. We must be more vigilant about putting
into practice the relevant recommendations in the
Council resolutions. We must also be more mindful of
the Secretary-General's recommendations aimed at
greater integration of women in prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding in post-conflict situations.

The obstacles to women taking a broader role are
often cultural in nature. We believe that this aspect can
be addressed in the Secretary-General's report devoted
to the high-level meeting scheduled for 2015. We also
encourage UN-Women to work more on overcoming
cultural obstacles that can hinder peacebuilding.
Greater action by UN-Women, particularly in Africa,
can be decisive. From that point of view, a crucial task
is finalizing work on the indicators likely to allow us to
assess progress but also, above all, measure the
impediments to our action. We would like to welcome
here the efforts made by the Secretary-General to
increase the number of women who hold positions of
senior responsibility in coordinating the Organization's
efforts to promote peace and security, both at the
Secretariat and in peacekeeping missions.

An important aspect of our debate is the link
between preventive diplomacy and the Council's
initiatives to promote the role of women in peace
processes. More than 10 years of continued efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) have revealed the
limits of a reactive approach. Gabon supports a more
comprehensive approach aimed at incorporating
conflict prevention as a fundamental part of an
effective strategy to protect women and young girls
from the agony of conflict and war. Through such a
strategy, women would have leading roles, which of
course entails women playing a part in the policy
sphere in peacetime so that they can be fully involved
in the different stages of mediation and political
negotiation in times of crisis. In this regard, regional
and subregional organizations, namely African
organizations, should also adopt such a strategy. The
African Union's incorporation of gender parity in the
highest positions of its hierarchy is a strong indication
of a move in that direction.

I would like to conclude by stressing that
promoting more effective political participation by
women at the level of the African continent to make
them effective agents in prevention and peacebuilding
efforts requires a greater contribution from all regional,
multilateral and even bilateral players. Setting up
programmes devoted to capacity-building for women
and young girls, including those aimed at their socio-
economic empowerment, are crucial, especially in the
reconstruction and peacebuilding phase. We also
believe that the various entities of the United Nations
system and regional and international financial
institutions, including the World Bank, must also play a
dominant role in this area.

We would like to express our full support for the
draft presidential statement that will be adopted at the
end of our debate.

