Ms. Phee (United States of America): The United
States would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
selection of this topic for your presidency's thematic
discussion. The debate on resolution 1325 (2000) has
become an important annual event precisely because it
is considered to embrace such a wide range of
significant concerns and issues related to the Security
Council's responsibility for international peace and
security.

As pointed out by the first four speakers this
morning, the United Nations must act - and, indeed,
in many instances has acted - to acknowledge and
strengthen the role of women in peace processes and in
post-conflict peacebuilding. Women can, and should,
be involved in both making peace and maintaining
security following conflict, not only in the sense of
patrolling streets, but also as builders of consensus and
leaders of reconciliation in post-conflict settings.

Women continue to take on greater roles as
agents of change throughout all our societies. That
dynamic is a healthy trend that all nations should
support and foster. Yet, all too often, women have been
largely excluded from formal efforts to develop and
implement fresh solutions to seemingly intractable
conflicts and their aftermath. Their involvement in
those processes to prevent conflict and stop war is
essential, and the United States takes seriously the
challenge of bringing women, as equals of men, into
the mainstream of decision-making and negotiation.

Allow me to cite some examples in which
women's involvement in the peace process has had an
immediate and lasting impact. One example comes
from Sierra Leone, where the Government included the

participation of four women in a team of nine in peace
talks that led to the development of the Lome Peace
Agreement of 1999. In Liberia, a group called the
Mano River Women's Peace Network won the United
Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights in 2003,
due to its involvement and positive influence in both
conflict resolution and peacebuilding in that country.
The group, compromised of women from Liberia and
neighbouring Guinea and Sierra Leone, directly
participated in the formal peace talks.

Another African example comes from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where horrendous
numbers of women and girls were raped, abducted and
physically abused as part of that conflict. Women's
groups there played a critical role in shining a light on
those abhorrent acts and in combating the stigma faced
by the victims. Today, those groups continue an active
campaign to mobilize the Government into holding
accountable those responsible for crimes against
women. I would also note that women are playing a
vital and important role in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo's democratic transition.

One last example involves Nepal. Women's
groups in that country were not only active in pushing
for peace, but were instrumental in securing a
guarantee of equal rights for women and men in the
country's new constitution. That achievement is
especially significant given the degree to which women
were involved in the conflict, both as combatants and
as victims.

Despite those successful examples of and by
women to increase and strengthen their role in
peacemaking, there remains resistance to the notion
that women can make a difference. The exclusion of
women from important decision-making and political
and social leadership roles is a deeply ingrained
tradition in many societies. Changes to that
counterproductive tradition will require a conscious,
deliberate effort by us all.

In the past, women's traditional roles in society
have often been used as an excuse for their exclusion
from decision-making and leadership, but the unique
roles and perspectives of women are essential to both
formal and informal peace processes, especially in
addressing entrenched cultures of violence. Because
women frequently outnumber men after a conflict -
such as in the case of the southern Sudan today, where
the ratio of women to men is two to one - they will

have a particularly critical role to play in the
implementation of any peace agreement and in building
the institutions that will maintain the peace.

Experience increasingly demonstrates that
incorporating the efforts of women peacebuilders
builds more effective programmes. Their inclusion will
advance their rights and lay the groundwork for a more
sustainable peace. Therefore, women have not only the
right, but the responsibility to be an integral part of all
stages of the peace process and the consolidation of
peace.

