Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, at the outset, to express our gratitude for
the convening of this important debate. We are also
grateful for the concept note (see S/2017/402, annex ). I
also thank today's briefers for their statements.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
Guatemala has accorded great importance to this
issue. We are especially concerned that sexual violence
continues to be used as an instrument of war to terrorize
populations. We cannot also not allow sexual violence
to be used to generate income from sexual slavery and
trafficking, much less for women and girls to be offered
as compensation for combatants of extremist groups.

We therefore emphatically condemn all of those
brutal acts, for besides clearly violating international
humanitarian law and human rights, they constitute
a rejection of human dignity. We fully support the
emphasis that the Secretary-General places on conflict
prevention and early warning. It is at that stage that we
must pay close attention in order to prevent the most
vulnerable - children, women and teenagers - from
having their human rights violated.

That is why we must continue to include sexual
violence as a designation criterion for imposing
sanctions and to ensure that sanctions committees
and monitoring mechanisms base their efforts on
experts specializing in gender-based and sexual
violence in conflict. We consider it timely for Special
Representatives to share information with sanctions
committees as needed.

We must underline the undeniable role that women
can and must play in peacebuilding. There is an
important link between women's full and meaningful
participation in preventing and resolving conflicts and
in post-conflict reconciliation and rebuilding efforts
and the long-term effectiveness and sustainability
of such efforts. Women must participate on an
equal footing when it comes to the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security. The international
community must insist on eliminating barriers to
the empowerment of women in the decision-making
process regarding conflict prevention and resolution,
as well as peacebuilding - just as they are drivers
of development - and we encourage more women to
participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Guatemala has deployed troops in areas of armed
conflict. That is why it recognized the importance of
resolution 1325 (2000) in laying the foundation for
integrating a gender perspective in missions on the
ground. We call for the implementation of the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy and commend the
initiative of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to ensure that troop-contributing countries distribute,
to their entire staff, pocket-sized cards entitled "There
is no excuse", which would clearly spell out the rules
and prohibitions for behaviours linked to sexual abuse
and exploitation.

Guatemala is currently drafting its action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000) through what we call an
inter-institutional table on women and peace and
security. The draft will be implemented shortly.

Finally, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Nevertheless, we understand that the scope
and nature of the challenge involved in sustaining
peace requires strategic and operational alliances
between the United Nations and Governments, as
well as other key stakeholders, if we are to jointly
achieve sustainable peace. The Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court is the most progressive
international legal framework for gender-based
crimes. We must incorporate it into national contexts
so that States can have a comprehensive framework
for investigating international crimes of sexual and
gender-based violence.

Finally, my delegation believes that this topic must
remain on the Council's agenda, given its interlinkages
with the pillars of peace and security, development and
human rights. We have in our hands two important tools
at our disposal - the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable

Development and sustainable peace. Let us use them
and together build a sustainable and harmonious future.

