Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): Allow me to
commence my statement by expressing gratitude to the
President for holding this Security Council meeting on
the topic of women and peace and security. Let me also
thank Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Ms. Ines Alberdi and
Ms. Sarah Taylor for their informative statements.

Kazakhstan welcomes the open nature of these
deliberations and the enlarged list of participants in
this debate. We hope that the contributions of States
not affected by any armed conflicts might somehow be
useful in the adoption of the meeting's outcome
document - not only in armed conflict, but in general.

Eight years have passed since Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) laid a cornerstone for a stronger
decision-making role for women in peace processes.
Periodic reports of the Secretary-General demonstrate
the obvious progress achieved in increased women's
involvement in the United Nations peacebuilding
operations and in the mitigation of the negative
influence of armed conflicts on them. However, despite
the undoubted importance of women's active
participation in the peace negotiation and decision-
making processes, such achievements do not yet meet
expectations.

The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) was a
landmark achievement. We believe that it is necessary
to develop concrete strategies that ensure gender
equality even in armed conflict situations.

We propose that United Nations efforts focus on
the promotion of women in the fields in which they
initially have a comparative advantage. In this regard,
we may refer to women's involvement in humanitarian
action, operation of camps for refugees and displaced
persons, and reintegration and rehabilitation of the
civilian population and child combatants. Women's
participation in peacekeeping operations can be
increased by bringing them on as civil humanitarian
staff. However, that measure of improvement should
not negatively influence the number of women
participating in official peace-related negotiations and
in the political decision-making on such issues.

My delegation deems it useful to attract more
world-renowned female leaders to the matters of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The international
authority and rich experience of such women can be
duly applied in the settlement of those critical issues
during armed conflicts.
Kazakhstan highly values the United Nations
achievements in ensuring women's equal participation
in conflict resolution at the political level. We are
pleased to note that women hold key posts in the
Secretariat and in the United Nations specialized
agencies dealing with women and children. This trend
must be maintained if resolution 1325 (2000) is to be
successfully implemented. In addition, one must agree
that it is easier for women leaders to recognize the
special needs and wants of women and children
affected by armed conflict. Their understanding can
have a positive impact on the effective provision of
humanitarian aid, for which there is an increasing
demand by affected populations.

Kazakhstan welcomes the development of a
roster of women candidates for United Nations
vacancies at all levels. We believe that that step is a
real confirmation of effective implementation of the
strategy for the advancement of women.

Besides promoting women's rights through the
increased presence of women as official representatives
of States and in the United Nations itself, it would be
beneficial for there to be additional deep engagement
with politically active women and relevant non-
governmental organizations. Such interested parties
could act as alternative sources of information in
decision-making processes and in the drafting of
outcome documents.

We believe that efforts of all women engaged in
peace processes deserve recognition. Indeed, official
United Nations acknowledgement of the considerable
contributions made by women to the cause of peace
and security could inspire others to take a similar path
and excel in it.

Since the assignment of women to any leadership
positions in the field requires that they have relevant
professional training, the promotion of education in the
field of peace processes should become an integral part
of educational practice worldwide.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize the positive
change in the perception of women, not solely as
victims of armed conflicts but also as a driving force
behind peacebuilding. This is the true meaning of
gender equality: providing women with extensive
opportunities to play a stronger role in preventing and
settling armed conflicts and in building peace.

