Mr. Martinez Bonilla (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): El Salvador is pleased to participate in this
important high-level debate on women and peace and
security as a country which experienced a lengthy
and bloody civil war that ended with the signing of
the peace agreements that laid a basis for a process
of democratization. That is why we acknowledge the
important role that is played by women in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as peacebuilding, as
highlighted in resolution 1325 (2000).

On the basis of that acknowledgement, as a country
we believe that it is a priority to work in order to
achieve greater participation by women in the various
peacekeeping operations. El Salvador is making efforts
to be able to enhance the participation of women
in the six peacekeeping missions in which we are
participating, in accordance with what is stipulated in
resolution 1325 (2000) and other subsequent Security
Council resolutions.

Given the importance that my country places in
compliance with this resolution, I am pleased to inform
Council members that El Salvador has made efforts at the
Government level, with the support of friendly countries
and international organizations, to set up our national
committee for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions. The members of the
committee were sworn in on 12 November 2014, and the
committee incorporates in its structure 17 Government
organizations, the public ministry, academia and civil
society. Its main objective is to propose policies and
standards that ensure compliance with the resolutions
and to ensure that we enhance the representation of
women at all levels of the decision-making processes
of national institutions and mechanisms, as well as
national, regional and international institutions for the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts.

In 2014, the mechanism to promote women as
members of the national committee presented a draft
document entitled "The Memory of the Fireflies", which
was carried out with the support of women survivors
and family members of the victims of the massacres
that took place in December 1981. That project carried
out an anthropological investigation to compile the
testimonies of women and to provide psycho-social
assistance in safe spaces where they were able to talk
about their experiences.

That gave rise to the publication ofa book and video
entitled "The Memory of the Fireflies", with which we
aim to reshape the knowledge of what happened during
the massacres from the point of view of their actual
life experience and also to preserve oral memory. With
that, we aim to promote the reparation process, taking
on not only the civilian compensation aspect but also
making the experiences of those women more visible.

Furthermore, in August 2015, El Salvador
organized the first regional workshop on training for
resolution 1325 (2000),with member countries of the
Central American Integration System. The aim was to
promote the development of national action plans for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in other
countries of the region. The workshop was inaugurated
and closed by President of Chile, Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
and the President of El Salvador, Mr. Salvador Sanchez
Ceren. Currently, our country is at the forefront of
formulating a road map that will make it possible to
ensure the follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions.

El Salvador expresses its support for all initiatives
that would ensure the participation of women in
the various peacekeeping contingents, in line with
resolution 1325 (2000) and other subsequent resolutions
of the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the
important work done by Spain as President of the
Security Council. Similarly, I would like to thank
UN-Women for its support and its attendant technical,
political and financial support for our efforts in our
national committee. At the same time, I would like to
call for that support to continue.

We hope that as people become familiar with
our experience, other countries in the region will be
encouraged to work more thoroughly when it comes
to the area of peace and security, especially from the
inclusion perspective that is set out in resolution 1325
(2000).

