Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): Kenya welcomes the
leadership shown by Uganda in holding this debate
during its presidency of the Council. This is a clear
demonstration of just how important it is for us to
tackle the growing problem of sexual and gender-based
violence if we are serious about resolving conflict,
empowering women and advancing gender equality.

The issue that we are addressing today - women
and peace and security - is important and deserves the
international community's utmost attention and
unequivocal support. Nearly 10 years ago, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which
ever since has constituted a basis for cooperation
among all the parties concerned in the field of women
and peace and security. National ownership by all
Member States of this resolution is crucial. We report
that we have made modest gains in creating institutions
and developing frameworks aimed at addressing
violence against women in conflict situations. We still,
however, sadly recognize that women and children
continue to suffer disproportionately in times of
conflict. Today, we recognize that violence against
women in all its manifestations must be dealt with
firmly and decisively. It is in this regard that I wish to
reiterate Kenya's commitment to the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), whose adoption we consider a milestone.

Kenya condemns all forms of violence against
women, including sexual violence, and has always
urged compliance with both humanitarian and human
rights law during times of conflict. Women must be
protected from violence and other atrocities during
times of conflict. Additionally, women must participate
in rebuilding efforts, free from threats, intimidation
and discrimination. It is important, therefore, that in
pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict situations, the
special needs of women be respected and their
concerns addressed. My delegation recognizes the
fundamental factor that women's perceptions, concerns
and opinions must form an integral part of all decision-
making processes at all levels in all peace and
reconciliation processes. Indeed, traditional stereotypes
that have consistently kept women away from the
negotiating table are already being broken and must
continue to be broken.

In Kenya, the newly promulgated constitution has
entrenched pertinent provisions relating to the
participation of women at the highest levels. The
legislature will now have 47 and 16 seats reserved for
women, in the National Assembly and the Senate
respectively, in addition to those who will be elected
from the various constituencies. Furthermore, in all
cases where special interests are represented in the
legislature, the seats will be divided equally between
men and women. As relates to national commissions
and other bodies, the representation by women shall
not be less than 30 per cent of the total membership,
and a woman shall serve in one of the two highest
positions in the entity.

Pursuant to the resolution, Kenya has made
deliberate efforts to increase the participation of
women in peacekeeping missions. Currently, we have
women in uniform deployed in the peacekeeping
missions in which Kenya is participating, and we are
determined to increase that number.

With the recent establishment of UN Women, we
believe that women will have a stronger voice to speak
on issues affecting them, including the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The coordination of the
various agencies, offices and mandate holders that deal
with women, and violence against women in particular,
will be crucial to the implementation of the resolution.

While it is understood that the Security Council
has an important role to play in dealing with peace and
security matters internationally, States bear the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens - women and
children in particular - from violence. It is in this
regard that my delegation calls for more concerted
efforts by the international community and the Security
Council to prevent and address the myriad issues
surrounding conflicts. Indeed, countries in conflict and
those that have recently emerged from conflict have
unique challenges which, if not comprehensively
addressed, will lead to either a continuation of or
relapse into conflict. The international community must

provide the necessary framework and assistance to
ensure that women do not suffer needlessly from
conflict or its aftermath. The adoption of resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) clearly
demonstrates an increased commitment on the part of
the Security Council to address violence against women.

Kenya expresses its deep gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2010/498), which, inter alia, showcases the key
sectors where tangible progress is being made in this
context and identifies gaps and challenges in
implementation. Kenya is particularly grateful for the
indicators that have been suggested in the report and
will seek to engage further with all Member States and
stakeholders in order to achieve the widest acceptance
of them. My delegation believes that the indicators are
preliminary and form an important basis for overall
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Adhering to the indicators, however, will have
budgetary implications, for which support is requested.

As relates to the implementation of the resolution,
many challenges still continue to hamper countries'
efforts to implement it, such as lack of capacity to
implement gender mainstreaming initiatives, weak
accountability mechanisms and limitations with respect
to funding and resources. All these issues have to be
addressed to ensure systematic integration and
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my country's
commitment to implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
Indeed, we are happy to report the ongoing discussions
being carried out among stakeholders in Kenya to
develop a action plan for the implementation of the
resolution. We support the Secretary-General in his
continued efforts to mainstream resolution 1325 (2000)
throughout the United Nations system.

