Mr. Ke (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council this month and for having
organized this important debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency Antenio
Guterres, and Major General Kristin Lund for the
informative briefing on the issue at hand.

Since 2006, Cambodia has contributed thousands
of troops to serve in some of the most dangerous
conflict zones throughout the world. Today, more than
800 Cambodians serve in peacekeeping operations in
the Sudan, South Sudan, Chad, Lebanon, Mali, the
Central African Republic, Syria and Cyprus.

Through our engagement in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Cambodia recognizes the
importance of human security and considers women
to be the driving force in maintaining the culture of
peace in our country and globally. Cambodia wishes
to reiterate its commitment in line with the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

Accordingly, Cambodia is fully committed to
increasing the number of civilian and uniformed women
in peacekeeping at all levels and in key positions.
Increasing women's participation in peacekeeping
operations is necessary not only to guarantee gender
parity among the forces, but also to improve mission
effectiveness and promote stability among the affected
populations on the ground.

Indeed, increasing women's participation can
help reduce the risk of sexual exploitation and abuse,
improve policing on the ground, contribute to effective
intelligence-gathering efforts and improve the process
of dispute settlement among local populations. These
are but a few of the benefits that women bring to
peacekeeping as indispensable members of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

In line with resolution 2242 (2015) and its call for
a revised strategy to double the number of women in
the military and police contingents of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Cambodia supports the
Secretary-General's efforts in this regard.

Currently, Cambodia has deployed 42 uniformed
women to peacekeeping operations in various
missions-11 in the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan; four in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic; 17 in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; and 10 in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. The Royal
Government of Cambodia is determined to gradually
increase the proportion of women in peacekeeping
operations to 20 per cent.

As efforts are made to promote gender parity,
partners must come together and provide support
through financial and technical assistance. Such a team
effort would ensure the speedier integration of United
Nations peacekeeping forces while helping to build the
capacities of States that may not have the resources or
the expertise to fully implement the necessary strategies
by themselves.

In that connection, I wish to highlight that, in
addition to the necessary skills, English training is
very important for uniformed women so that they can
effectively communicate in performing their mission.

In conclusion, Cambodia stands together with all its
partners in support of the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. We assure the Council
that we will continue working diligently to improve
the lives of the most vulnerable populations through
integrated, accountable, well-coordinated and effective
peacekeeping efforts.

