Mr. O'Toole (Ireland): We thank Uruguay for
convening today's debate.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Observer of the European Union and with the
statement delivered by the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.

I also pay tribute to the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, and wish
the new Special Representative, Ms. Pramila Patten,
success as she takes up her important role.

The recent report (S/2017/249) of the Secretary-
General highlights the various challenges we face in
addressing conflict-related sexual violence. Ireland
would like to emphasize three areas we feel are in need
of particular attention today.

First, in terms of the link between sexual violence
and trafficking, sexual violence in trafficking are
issues that must be dealt with by all countries. However,
in times of war, relevant prevention and protection
mechanisms are almost completely eroded, allowing
the activities of terrorist groups and criminal networks
to thrive. Resolution 2331 (2016) is our strongest legal
instrument yet for highlighting the relationship between
sexual violence and trafficking in situations of conflict.
We look forward to enhanced efforts by the States
Members of the United Nations and the Organization
itself aimed at implementing this innovative resolution
in complementarity with the women and peace and
security agenda. Moreover, as Member States look

towards adopting two global compacts in 2018, we hope
that the vulnerability of migrants and refugees to both
trafficking and sexual violence, on the one hand, and
the need for women's participation in finding solutions,
on the other hand, are strongly reflected in them.

Secondly, with respect to the need to place victims'
needs and perspectives at the core of our work, the
Secretary-General's report outlines how victims of
conflict-related sexual violence can be re-victimized
even after their ordeal has ended - women interrogated
as potential affiliates of extremist groups instead of
receiving treatment and support as victims of terrorism,
children facing legal and social discrimination having
been born from rape, and boys and men finding
themselves excluded from victim support and redress.
We commend the work of the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and her team
for giving a voice to those victims. We hope to see an
increase in invitations to the Special Representative
to brief the relevant sections committees, as well as
to civil-society and victims representatives to deliver
briefings in the Chamber. As a troop-contributing
country, Ireland also supports further efforts to
integrate the perspectives of civil society and local
communities into United Nations peace operations.

Thirdly, with regard to the emphasis on prevention,
we welcome the focus placed by the Secretary
General's report on the link between accountability and
prevention. Ireland calls for the United Nations, and
in particular its Member States, to support sensitized
and expert means to pursue accountability for sexual
violence in conflict - for example through the work
undertaken by Justice Rapid Response and the Team
of Experts. Moreover, if peacekeepers deployed by the
United Nations fail to prevent sexual violence, or in fact
serve as the perpetrators of such crimes, as we have
shockingly seen, they must be held accountable. Troop-
contributing countries and the United Nations itself
have clear responsibilities in that regard.

We must also pursue prevention by understanding
and tackling the conditions in which sexual violence
can occur. If we implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, including Goals 5 and 16;
if we make smart, sustained investments to prevent
conflict and violent extremism; if we integrate the
women and peace and security agenda into all of our
work on the ground; and if we reorient our peace and
security architecture to foster sustaining peace, then
we will be contributing to preventing future cases of
sexual violence in conflict.

In conclusion, unfortunately, sexual violence in
conflict has been a recurring feature of our collective
history. However, the international community has never
been better informed, nor has it been better equipped
with legal and practical tools to tackle this scourge. The
implementation of the report's recommendations would
serve as a significant step towards eliminating sexual
violence in conflict.

