Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's open
debate on this important and pertinent issue and for
the informative concept note (S/2015/749, annex). In
order to give other colleagues a chance to speak today,
I will make only a few points and request that my full
statement be circulated.

The Secretary-General's annual report (S/2015/716)
is being considered at a historic moment, when we
have just adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)
and commemorated both the fortieth anniversary of
the historic first World Conference on Women of the
United Nations, held in Mexico City, and the twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
of Action. If we are to sustain solutions to conflict
situations, we must synergize the agenda relating
to women and peace and security with the relevant
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda.

If the Security Council cannot reflect that
perspective in its deliberations while drawing up
mandates for peace operations, we will not succeed in
achieving the desired synergy. Developing countries
must have a greater presence in the permanent
membership of the Council, which is why the Council's
existing structure is in urgent need of reform, as was
agreed on by all our leaders at the 2005 World Summit.

The United Nations must encourage women's full
and meaningful participation and leadership in the
decision-making processes of conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. In
that context, our pioneering role in Liberia, where India
became the first United Nations State Member to send
an all-female peacekeeping unit, illustrates what we are
calling for.

National Governments must be encouraged and
assisted in developing and implementing national
strategies in the context of resolution 1325 (2000). The
key to national capacity-building is not the temporary
deployment of external humanitarian experts, but the
actual process of transferring experiences in human-
resource development and building national institutions
by Member States that are willing and able to share
their experiences. The recent commitment we made at
the leaders' summit on United Nations peacekeeping
to ramping up our contribution of enablers and skilled
personnel from our armed forces, especially our police,
is an illustration of how India proposes to address the
issue. It goes without saying that such assistance must
be consented to by the host Government, so that the
United Nations can actually contribute to the objectives
of peacebuilding. It is logical for us to point out here
that such an approach, based on our experience as a
troop-contributing country, requires the Council
to implement, in letter and spirit, the provisions of
Article 44 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
allow troop-contributing countries, like us, that are
not represented on the Council to sit face to face with
Council members when it is drawing up mandates for
United Nations peace operations.

In conclusion, we believe that any diversion from
that objective towards other thematic issues, including
human rights, violent extremism and countering
terrorism, will endanger and dilute the work being done
separately in the General Assembly and the Council,
and will put undue strain on the already stretched
resources of the United Nations.

