Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, President of the Government of Spain, for
convening this important meeting and for presiding over
it yourself. My thanks also go to our briefers, who have

spoken clearly on concrete crimes, with striking power
and courage to reveal these attacks against human
dignity that taking place even now on the ground.

Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2331 (2016), which is the very first resolution
of the Council to address trafficking in persons in
conflict. I would like to express my sincere appreciation
for the strong leadership of Spain in guiding us towards
this goal.

Japan welcomes the resolution, which makes it
clear that trafficking in persons is connected to sexual
violence, terrorism and other international organized
criminal activities and also that it exemplifies how
trafficking in persons in armed conflict and sexual
violence can be and is used as a tactic by certain
terrorist groups.

Trafficking in persons in conflict situations is a
violation of human dignity and human rights, but it
does not stop there. It is being used more and more
systematically, sometimes accompanied by sexual
violence, by terrorist groups and non-State actors as
a tool for fundraising, recruitment and the destruction
of communities. In such cases it poses serious threats
to international peace and security. The international
community is responsible for removing this threat by
holding those who engage in such activities accountable.

The briefings heard by the Council today, especially
from Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha, convince us of
the urgent need to take action to combat this problem.
In order to accurately recognize and address the
situation effectively, the Security Council needs to
have relevant information. This resolution promotes
information-sharing in the Council by requesting the
Secretary-General to report on trafficking in persons
in armed conflict and by welcoming briefings to be
submitted to the Council by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNDOC) and other relevant actors.

Furthermore, the resolution expresses the Council's
intention to integrate this issue into the work of the
relevant sanctions committees, in accordance with
their mandates, to invite the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and on Children and Armed Conflict to brief those
committees. I am confident that such steps will enable
us to move forward effectively.

Japan acknowledges that the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol on
trafficking in persons are essential as an international
framework to combat trafficking in persons. It is
necessary to ensure that the spirit of the Convention
is reflected in national laws of Member States and
effectively implemented.

In that regard, Japan attaches great importance to
the assistance provided by the relevant entities, such as
UNDOC and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence, including on legislation and law
enforcement. We expect them to make further progress
and we strongly support their critical work.

In concluding, I would like to reaffirm Japan's
commitment to contributing to the efforts of all to
combat the trafficking of persons in conflict.

