The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. I am sure we all agree that this
was a rich and meaningful debate.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the continuing and full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
recalls the statements of its President of 31
October 2001 (S/PRST/2001/31), 31 October
2002 (S/PRST/2002/32) and 28 October 2004
(S/PRST/2004/40) as reiterating that commitment.

"The Security Council recalls the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution A/60/1), the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action (A/CONF.177/20/Rev.1), the
outcomes of the Conference and of the twenty-
third special session of the General Assembly,
entitled 'Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first
century', and the Declaration of the forty-ninth
session of the Commission on the Status of
Women on the occasion of the tenth anniversary
of the Fourth World Conference on Women
(E/CN.6/2005/11).

"While welcoming the progress achieved so
far, the Security Council stresses the importance
and urgency of accelerating the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of full and equal participation of
women in peace processes at all levels and urges
Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations system to
enhance the role of women in decision-making
with regard to all peace processes and post-
conflict reconstruction and rebuilding of
societies.

"The Security Council welcomes the
various initiatives and actions undertaken by
Member States, the United Nations entities, civil
society organizations and other relevant actors,
focused on supporting and increasing the
representation of women in peace negotiations
and mainstreaming gender perspectives into
peace agreements.

"The Security Council recognizes and
welcomes the roles of, and contributions made
by, women as mediators, educators, peacemakers,

peacebuilders and advocates for peace, as well as
their active contribution to reconciliation efforts
and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes.

"The Security Council recognizes the
constant underrepresentation of women in formal
peace processes and is deeply concerned about
persistent obstacles and challenges resulting from
situations such as violence against women,
shattered economies and social structures, lack of
rule of law, poverty, limited access to education
and resources, various forms of discrimination
and stereotypes. The Security Council believes
that more must be done in order to achieve the
greater participation and effective contribution of
women at the negotiating table and in developing
and implementing post-conflict strategies and
programmes.

"The Security Council encourages Member
States and the Secretary-General to maintain
regular contacts with local women's
organizations and networks, to utilize their
knowledge, expertise and resources and to ensure
their involvement in reconstruction processes,
particularly at the decision-making level.

"The Security Council also encourages
Member States, donors and civil society to
provide financial, political and technical support,
as well as adequate training for women's
peacebuilding initiatives and networks.

"The Security Council welcomes the United
Nations system-wide action plan for the
implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) across the United Nations system,
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
on women and peace and security (S/2005/636),
and requests the Secretary-General to update,
monitor and review its implementation and
integration on an annual basis, and report to the
Security Council, starting in October 2006. In
this context, the Security Council urges the
Secretary-General to proceed with the
appointment of a gender adviser within the
Department of Political Affairs and to continue to
identify women candidates for senior level
positions within the United Nations system,
including as Special Representatives. In this
regard, the Council invites the Member States to

provide the Secretary-General with candidates, as
appropriate.

"The Security Council reiterates its call to
Member States to continue to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), including through the
development of national action plans or other
national level strategies.

"The Security Council welcomes the
decision taken in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) to
establish the Peacebuilding Commission and
looks forward to its contribution to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
inviting the Commission to pay particular
attention to the knowledge and understanding
women can bring, through their participation and
empowerment, in peacebuilding processes.
"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that all peace accords
concluded with United Nations assistance address
the specific effects of armed conflict on women
and girls, as well as their specific needs and
priorities in the post-conflict context. Within this
framework, the Security Council underlines the
importance of a broad and inclusive political
consultation with various components of civil
society, in particular women's organizations and
groups.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to integrate gender perspectives into
the terms of reference of Security Council visits
and missions and to include gender specialists in
its teams wherever possible.

"The Security Council condemns sexual and
other forms of violence against women, including
trafficking in persons, and calls upon all parties
to armed conflict to ensure full and effective
protection of women and emphasizes the
necessity to end impunity of those responsible for
gender-based violence.

"The Security Council reiterates its
condemnation, in the strongest terms, of all acts
of sexual misconduct by all categories of
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The Council welcomes the
comprehensive report on sexual exploitation and
abuse by United Nations peacekeeping personnel
(A/59/710). The Council also welcomes the
report of the resumed session of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/59/19/Add.1) and, taking into account
resolution 59/300 of the General Assembly, urges
the Secretary-General and troop-contributing
countries to ensure that the recommendations of
the Special Committee, which fall within their
respective responsibilities, are implemented
without delay. In this connection, the Council
expresses its support for the efforts of the United
Nations to fully implement codes of conduct and
disciplinary procedures to prevent and respond to
sexual exploitation and enhance monitoring and
enforcement mechanisms, and notes the strategies
and actions included in the system-wide action
plan to fully implement those codes of conduct
and disciplinary procedures.

"The Security Council urges troop-
contributing countries to take appropriate
preventive action, including the conduct of pre-
deployment awareness training, and to take
disciplinary action and other action to ensure full
accountability in cases of misconduct involving
their personnel."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/52.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.35 pm.
