Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First of all,
permit me, on behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, to
thank you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Ghana
for taking the initiative to organize this open debate. As
a member-elect of the Council, we look forward to
working with the other Council members to bring
about further progress in implementing resolution 1325
(2000).

I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2007/567).

Alongside basic instruments on gender equality,
such as the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) continues to be the
guidelines in dealing with the issue of women, peace
and security. The Vietnamese delegation is pleased to
note that, as highlighted in the report of the Secretary-
General, the work of United Nations entities since the
first review of the implementation of the Action Plan,
held in 2006, has laid important groundwork for a
long-term effort by the United Nations system towards
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Progress has been reported in a wide range of
spheres of activities, such as conflict prevention and
early warning; peacemaking and peacebuilding;
peacekeeping operations; humanitarian response; post-
conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; preventing and
responding to gender-based violence in armed conflict;
and preventing and responding to sexual exploitation
and abuse by humanitarian and peacekeeping
personnel. However, in the view of my delegation,
what is most important of all is the increased political
commitment of many entities to gender equality and
women's empowerment in peace processes. We would
not have seen improved advocacy, enhanced leadership
and greater support by senior officials of those entities,
as well as their better engagement with Member States
and partnership with national mechanisms for women
and women's associations and networks - which are
all valuable and commendable - without such
increased political commitment.

On the one hand, the large number of entities
involved points to the potential of the United Nations
system to advance our cause. On the other, it shows
how great the need is to ensure effective inter-agency
coordination. In that connection, in addition to the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, my delegation commends the
efforts made by the Inter-Agency Network on Women
and Gender Equality and by the Inter-Agency Task
Force on Women, Peace and Security.

The report of the Secretary-General points out
that, while both the 2006 and 2007 implementation
reviews clearly demonstrate progress, they also
identify a number of institutional gaps and challenges,
as well as the weaknesses of the Action Plan itself.
Gender imbalance has not been adequately addressed,
leaving women underrepresented in the Secretariat. In
some areas, the representation of women has even
decreased in comparison with last year. Capacity-
building, coordination and cooperation by and among
United Nations entities should be improved
considerably. On top of that, the issue of adequate and
predictable funding requires, as always, undivided
attention, if we are to strengthen and further the
progress made.

We agree with the Secretary-General that, taken
together, those gaps and challenges constitute
shortcomings in the capacity of the United Nations
system to effectively implement resolution 1325
(2000). With regard to the way forward, the
reconceptualization of the 2008-2009 Action Plan is
designed to address those gaps and challenges,
including in the areas of monitoring and reporting,
capacity-building, partnerships and networking, et
cetera. The results-based framework for 2008-2009 is
being developed to produce concrete and measurable
results. We welcome the intention to consolidate all
activities by United Nations entities into five thematic
areas under the updated 2008-2009 Action Plan. While
sharing the hope that that step will help improve both
implementation and monitoring, we believe that we
should not lose sight of actions aimed at long-term
impact, which is sometimes intangible and hard to
measure. On another note, we support the proposed
establishment of a database on good practices and
lessons learned.

Vietnamese women have always played an active
role in national defence in times of war and in national
construction in times of peace. In Viet Nam today,
gender-sensitive legislation, policies, strategies and
programmes of action and the network of national
mechanisms for the advancement of women all work
together for the achievement of gender equality and the
advancement of women in all aspects of life -
political, economic and social. In Viet Nam, the cause
of the advancement of women and the enhancement of
their role enjoys the ongoing support of the country's
leadership, and of men. We will continue to support
and cooperate with United Nations entities,
non-governmental organizations and other partners in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

