Mrs. Zappia (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to congratulate Bolivia on having convened this
important open debate.

Italy aligns itself with the statements to be made
by the observer of the European Union and the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Women, Peace and Security.

Conflict prevention begins in times of peace and
must start with gender equality and the empowerment
ofwomen and girls. There is indeed strong evidence that
women's empowerment and gender equality lead to more
peaceful and stable outcomes. By contrast, the larger
the gender gap and the marginalization, exclusion and
lost opportunities of women, the more likely a country
is to be involved in inter- and intra-State conflict and
to use violence as a first response in a conflict setting.
Here I would like to present some lines of action for an
enhanced commitment of the international community
as a whole.

First, I will address setting the standard. We
commend the fact that since the launch of the gender
parity strategy, many United Nations entities have
made parity commitments and now include gender
parity in their performance evaluation processes. More
countries are also joining the Circle of Leadership on
the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations, launched by
the Secretary-General last year, to implement a zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, and
other stakeholders that are working with the United
Nations now feel compelled to follow that path.

In that regard, Italy has made gender equality a
central commitment of its foreign policy. Last year,
we held the first-ever ministerial meeting of the Group
of Seven entirely dedicated to gender. In 2018, within
the framework of our Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) chairmanship, we are
mainstreaming a gender perspective in all initiatives,
and the implementation of the OSCE Action Plan
for the Promotion of Gender Equality is high on our
agenda. Italy is part of the Circle of Leadership of the
Secretary-General, has signed its voluntary compact,
and is honoured to be the top donor to the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse perpetrated by United Nations personnel.

Secondly, we must ensure the meaningful
participation of women across the peace cycle.
Numbers show that we are still very far from reaching
that objective. As the Secretary-General said this
morning, between 1990 and 2017 women comprised
only 2 per cent of mediators, 8 per cent of negotiators
and 5 per cent of witnesses and signatories of peace
agreements. In order to facilitate the appointment of
women mediators and special envoys at the local and
international levels, Italy launched the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network. The purpose of the
Network is twofold - prevention and mediation on the
one hand, and capacity-building on the other.

In the Mediterranean region, where migration issues
are compounded by human trafficking, transnational
organized crime, rising violent extremism and refugee
and humanitarian emergencies, women have a major
role to play in helping countries to prevent conflicts
and strengthen national reconciliation processes. They
do so by ensuring a gendered and inclusive perspective
on issues of security, justice and governance, which are
often the root causes of violent conflicts. That Network
is also a concrete way for women to acquire and develop
capacity and expertise to work successfully as official
United Nations mediators or mediation experts. I am
proud to see that some of the women mediators of our
Network are here today in the Chamber.

Thirdly, in conflict situations we need effective
peacekeeping operations. That can be achieved, first
of all, by raising the numbers of female peacekeepers.
Female peacekeepers can access populations and
environments that are closed to men, and thereby
improve intelligence with regard to potential security
risks. Women peacekeepers improve dispute resolution,
build trust with communities and are more likely to be
accepted by civilians, and thereby advance stability and
the rule of law.

Effective peacekeeping also requires appropriate
training. That is what we do with the Center ofExceIlence
for Stability Police Units in Vicenza, Italy, which
provides high-quality training and specialized courses
to peacekeepers on the rule of law, the protection of
civilians, sexual and gender-based violence in conflict
and the broader women and peace and security agenda.

Fourthly, I turn to accountability for violations.
Unfortunately, sexual violence is still an effective
weapon of war and it comes at no cost if there are no
consequences to those crimes. Over the past few decades,
the international community has taken progressive
steps to put an end to impunity for sexual and gender-
based crimes at the global level. The Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court expressly lists various
forms of sexual and gender-based crimes as underlying
acts of crimes against humanity and war crimes. Also,
as mentioned a few days ago in an interesting Arria
Formula meeting on that topic, the Council should
impose targeted sanctions against individuals who
have committed sexual violence. Together with other
partners, we initiated that in January 2017, when sexual
and gender-based violence was included as a stand-
alone designation criterion in the renewal of sanctions
on the Central African Republic. Now it is up to the
Council to establish sexual violence as an automatic
designation criterion.

As emphasized by the Secretary-General, there
is still a huge gap between commitments and reality.
Women remain underrepresented, marginalized and
vulnerable to the most heinous consequences of
conflicts. The commitments undertaken in this Chamber
and elsewhere must be translated into the financial
and political support needed for the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. Increasing
the number of women peacekeepers, achieving full
parity in United Nations management positions and
targeting investments in women, especially in conflict
areas, are lines of action, as pointed out earlier by the
Secretary-General and Executive Director Mlambo-
Ngcuka, which Italy supports strongly. They pave
the way for a radical change in gender culture and
the meaningful participation of women, especially in
decision-making processes.

