Mr. Acharya (Nepal): My delegation wishes to
express its sincere appreciation to you, Madam
President, for organizing this important open debate on
women and peace and security in the Security Council
today. I thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women, the President of the Economic
and Social Council and the representative of civil
society for their briefings this morning. We greatly
appreciate the establishment of UN-Women, which will
certainly raise the profile of women's issues on the
global agenda.

Resolution 1325 (2000) brought to the fore the
importance of women as peacemakers and
peacebuilders. The resolution was a historic shift from
the traditional perspective, which saw women as
passive recipients of the suffering produced by
conflict. It rightly stressed the role of women as active
participants with important and indispensable parts to
play in peacemaking and peacebuilding. The resolution
rightly urged Member States to mainstream the gender
perspective by ensuring an increased representation of
women at all decision-making levels in the areas of the
prevention, management and resolution of conflict,
post-conflict reconstruction and institution-building.

On the eleventh anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), it is high time to take stock of
our achievements, identify challenges and share
experiences of successes and difficulties to ensure an
enhanced level of effort and support for the effective
implementation of the resolution. There have been
many notable efforts in a broad range of areas by
Member States, the United Nations system, and civil
society organizations towards the resolution's
implementation. Yet there are areas where our
concerted efforts are needed. Countries emerging from
conflict are in need of genuine partnership and
cooperation from the international community to fill
the gaps in the financial resources and human and
technical expertise needed to rebuild their societies.
The lofty goals and vision of resolution 1325 (2000)
will remain unfulfilled if countries coming out of
conflict are left without adequate financial and human
resources and capacity-building.

The Government of Nepal is proud to inform the
international community that it has adopted a national
action plan for the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008) for the five-year period from
2011 to 2015. For Nepal, a country coming out of
conflict, the adoption of a national action plan is a
manifestation of our commitment to making the role of
women in peacebuilding and the country's overall
governance prominent. Our national action plan is
time-bound and structured around five pillars, namely,
participation, protection and prevention, promotion,
relief and recovery, and monitoring and evaluation.
The plan was prepared with the broadest possible

consultations with all stakeholders, and as such it
implies their important role in its implementation. In
particular, the growing awareness of the rights of
women and their increasing role in local governance,
women-specific issues and development-related
activities are good signs of progress, which we can
attribute to the recent transformation in Nepal.

We are ready and eager to collaborate with the
international community for effective implementation
of our national action plan. As enshrined in Nepal's
Interim Constitution, one third of Parliament is
represented by women. This political representation
will be continued down to village-level elected bodies.
Local peace committees are functioning in all districts
with at least 33 per cent of participation of women, and
are empowered to address post-conflict-related issues
at the local level.

Nepal has been implementing gender-based
budgeting for some years, through which gender
mainstreaming gets special attention in all
development activities. We have introduced a policy of
affirmative action in various areas, including the civil
service, with a view to ensuring that women are placed
at public sector decision-making levels. We are also
committed to increasing the number of women in our
army and police forces.

The Government of Nepal has accorded a high
priority to the protection and promotion of women's
rights. We believe that it is only in an inclusive process
that our progress and development become sustainable
and equitable. Besides that, women are major
stakeholders in any country's progress, since their
promotion has a strong multiplier effect in many
economic and social sectors.

We have adopted various measures to fight
against gender-related violence, including setting up a
toll-free hotline at the Office of the Prime Minister,
and establishing a gender violence prevention fund and
various gender violence control committees in all
districts throughout the country. We are committed to
establishing women's and children's service centres in
police stations across the country for the expeditious
investigation and prosecution of sexual and gender-
related violence cases.
With the support and cooperation of all, we
intend to translate our commitments into actions.
Ensuring the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) will have a long-term salutary impact on

the international community as a whole. It ensures the
rightful place of women as peacemakers, peacebuilders
and peacekeepers in this turbulent world. That is what
we need the most at this time. This debate is therefore
a step forward in charting our course for the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

