Mr. Roux (spoke in French): Let me begin by
reiterating our support to the Russian delegation and
extending our sympathy and solidarity following
yesterday's events.

On behalf of INTERPOL, I thank Spain for having
convened today's very important meeting and for
allowing us to speak on a subject that is one of our
main priorities. INTERPOL is a global institution for
police cooperation that is dedicated to supporting its
190 member States in combating the hateful atrocities
that violate fundamental human rights. To that end, we
have built a dedicated team focused specifically on all
aspects of human trafficking. It offers many support
and cooperation services in the areas of prevention,
protection, prosecution and partnership, both as the
central level in Lyon and at regional offices. Our
support to member States is above all operational by
assisting their police forces in dismantling criminal
human trafficking networks that are very active in
several regions.

Field operations are preceded by preparatory
workshops to ensure that operatives have the skills,
qualifications and key resources, as well as the national
partnerships and partnerships with non-governmental
organizations required to lend support to victims.
Between 2009 and 2016, such operational activities
have enabled over 3,000 victims to be saved, more than
320 people smugglers to be arrested and over 1,500
police officers and public officials from member States
to be trained.

With regard to specific tools and capacities,
INTERPOL offers a wide range of services to its member
States such as a regularly updated training manual for
investigators, red notices for tracing criminals and
suspects, locating victims and for collecting information
that could be useful in investigations and finally,
nominal databases containing information on stolen,
lost or forged travel documents, digital fingerprints
and an image databank for investigators. Such tools are

accessible at border crossings and 24 hours a day, seven
days a week.

Finally, with regard to coordinating partnership
efforts, INTERPOL leads two dedicated working
groups: the Group of Experts on Human Trafficking
that meets annually and the Specialist Operational
Network against Migrant Smuggling. We also organize
an annual conference on human trafficking open to
both private and public sector stakeholders. The most
recent conference was held in Lugano in October and
brought together 213 participants. Our 2017 programme
is already quite heavy and is focused on training
and operational support, in particular in conflict
areas, in order to dismantle criminal networks that
are operational. We will always be at the service of
the Council.

