Mr. Vukasinovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate. Many important anniversaries converge in the
year 2015, creating critical momentum and presenting
us with a unique opportunity to push harder, strive even
farther and achieve far more than we had envisioned
for the next 15 years. This meeting comes at a decisive
juncture in our year-long assessment of past actions,
implementation gaps, good practices and overall
accomplishments, where re-evaluating the progress
made is of vital importance and the reinforcement of
our dedication to the implementation of the set goals is
as crucial as ever.

Fifteen years ago the Council not only recognized
the urgent need to address the devastating impact
conflicts have on women and girls around the world,
but also the importance of the inclusion of wider gender
components in the peace and security agenda. It was an
official acknowledgment of women's right to participate
in all aspects of conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and to be included in
decision-making bodies at all levels of governance.
The Council followed up its action on this front
with number of subsequent resolutions that build upon
international and national historic commitments to
women's rights and gender equality, requiring a level
of commitment to their full implementation from
all major stakeholders. Responsibility, however, lies
primarily with Member States to integrate resolution
1325 (2000) and other women and peace and security
resolutions into regional and national policies and
programmes to ensure that their implementation is
coherent, sustainable and results-oriented.

At this moment, the need for stronger and more
complete implementation of the parameters of resolution
1325 (2000) and guidelines is disturbingly evident in
long-lasting, ongoing and even newly emerged conflict
around the world. It is becoming more and more
apparent that the vision and agenda of resolution 1325
(2000) needs to be constantly built and improved upon,
as even the substantial framework we have created has
been continuously confronted with new and ever-more
challenging risk factors, deteriorating humanitarian
situations in the wake of conflicts, persistent disrespect

and disregard for women's rights in a number of
countries and the continued violence against their
person, both physical and emotional.

It requires our continuous vigilance, with a sharper
focus on prevention and mechanisms that place human
rights at the core of the security, protection, political,
humanitarian, peacebuilding and socioeconomic
development work and agenda. What we note with
alarm, as pointed out in this year's annual report
(S/2015/716) of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security, that key findings of the global
study, the report of the High-Level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations and the report (S/2015/490) of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture all identify blatant
violations of human rights and humanitarian law,
complex drivers of conflict, the involvement of a
growing number of non-State armed actors and new
technologies and transnational connections, which are
changing the nature of warfare.

It is for those reasons that we welcome the high-
level review and the global study on the implementation
of the resolution 1325 (2000), as it further underscores
the importance of gender equality, the human
rights of women and girls and empowerment being
systematically integrated into all discussions and future
actions. Furthermore, we hope it will provide for strong
and meaningful impetus for transforming efforts into
viable actions on the ground, where it matters most.
We are particularly pleased that Bosnia and
Herzegovina contributed constructively to the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and that regional consultations with the Balkan
countries, including their experiences, challenges and
recommendations, have been considered critical to
charting the way towards a future commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda.

For Bosnia and Herzegovina, gender equality
and the empowerment of women remain a priority,
both at the national and international levels. We have
created a solid legal and institutional framework for
the advancement of gender equality, in which the
State requires affirmative measures aimed at realizing
gender equality. Both the national gender action plan
for the period 2013-2017 and the system-wide action
plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) for the period 2014-2017 define
priority measures for improvements and advancement
in line with the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and the overall 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1).
That framework has been further strengthened
with the adoption of the framework strategy for the
implementation of the Council of Europe Convention
on preventing and combating violence against women
and domestic violence, with the sole purpose of
providing for consistent, high-quality and effective
implementation of that Convention in the territory of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We realize that much more remains to be done in
a number of identified key areas of concern, through
a stronger commitment translated into concrete action.
For that reason, allow me to recall the commitments
undertaken by the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina during the Global Leaders Meeting
on Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment, held
in September. There must be prompt implementation
of the Framework Strategy for the Implementation of
the Istanbul Convention, which addresses three main
priority areas of concern, namely, the greater inclusion
of women and the reduction of women's segregation
in the labour market, the prevention of domestic
violence and, finally, support for the women victims
of sexual violence in conflict. Bosnia and Herzegovina
is committed to achieving those objectives in our joint
efforts for the full realization of the women and peace
and security agenda.

Finally, allow me to commend the dedication of three
extraordinary women who have been at the forefront
of women's empowerment and equality: Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women;
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
and the lead author of the global study, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and former Special Rapporteur on violence against
women. We thank them for their ongoing tireless work.

