Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I would like to start by
commending Japan for its decision to convene this
meeting and by expressing our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/770) on
women, peace and security. I would like also to thank
all the speakers who made introductory statements
today.

As we review today the first progress report on
the implementation of the System-wide Action Plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), we have
some mixed feelings of achievement coupled with
confusion. The questionnaire that was addressed to 39
United Nations entities on the status of the
implementation of the resolution and the Action Plan
resulted in responses from only 29 entities. The report
does not indicate whether the rest of the entities
refused to cooperate with the study or just neglected
the subject. We would appreciate further clarification
in that regard.

In the meantime, it was surprising to my
delegation to read, in paragraph 38 of the report, of the
clear acknowledgment that the System-wide Action
Plan is established not as a United Nations system-
wide strategy, but rather as a compilation of planned or
ongoing activities by United Nations entities in those
areas for action where expertise and resources are
available. That serious statement clearly indicates that
States Members of the United Nations are not leading
the process of the advancement of women, which
should be done by defining specific mandates that the
Secretariat must implement to the best of its ability, in
particular in areas related to the issue of women and
peace and security.

The two focus group discussions that took place
in the process leading to the preparation of the report
limited their scope only to members of the Security
Council and the so-called Friends of resolution 1325
(2000), on the one hand, and to the Non-governmental
Organization Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security, on the other. It did not include the wider
membership of the General Assembly. This subject is
interlinked with the original mandate of the General
Assembly and the treaty bodies established to monitor
these important issues - foremost among which is the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women. Such principal organs and treaty
bodies should have a say in formulating such a
strategy. Furthermore, classifying Member States as
friends or non-friends of the resolution establishes an
artificial divide that leads to misunderstanding and that
should be deleted from the report. We all support
enhancing the role of women in the areas of peace and
security. There are no friends or enemies of resolution
1325 (2000).

The report addressed a wide range of activities
that are being dealt with by the United Nations,
revealing many gaps and challenges. But the
underlying theme, which we fully support, is that
efforts exerted to enhance the links between women
and peace and security should be carried out at the
national level, and that the role of the United Nations is
to support those efforts, thereby codifying national
ownership of such efforts according to the capacity of
the country concerned and taking into consideration the
specificities of each country in conflict or in the
peacebuilding process.

In addressing the institutional gaps and
challenges, we must admit that the spread of
uncoordinated activities through 39 entities in the
United Nations system and beyond, coupled with a
weak system of accountability and a lack of resources
from the regular budget - with almost full dependence
on voluntary contributions that are earmarked to
certain countries - all constitute a recipe for failure.
We must admit that the main question under
consideration should be whether the advancement of
women and efforts aimed at gender equality should be
dealt with in all entities of the Secretariat, with a
closely coordinated mechanism that ensures achieving
results, or whether that should be centralized in certain
sections of the Secretariat. The report of the Secretary-
General's High-level Panel on United Nations System-
wide Coherence in the Areas of Development,
Humanitarian Assistance and the Environment will be
crucial in focusing our discussions on whether we
centralize or decentralize how women's issues are
addressed within the Organization.

Our efforts at this stage should concentrate on
widening the scope of consultations to include all
States Members of the United Nations as well as the
new organs, in particular the Peacebuilding
Commission. That will provide a solid foundation for
redrafting the System-wide Action Plan to reflect what
States Members of the Organization would like to see
done, and to allocate the necessary funds for its
implementation from the regular budget. We believe
that the Action Plan should become a complete United
Nations strategy, with clearly defined objectives,
whose implementation the Secretariat must ensure.

