Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): My delegation
would like to begin by thanking Nigeria for the
initiative to hold this meeting.

We also would like to begin by associating
ourselves with the statement to be made by the
representative of Vanuatu on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States (SIDS). We present this
statement in our national capacity.
11-57075

One of the six main goals of the UN-Women
strategic plan, 2011-2013 (see UNW/2011/9), deals
with women's leadership in peace, security and
humanitarian response. That plan has outcomes with
targets and indicators by which we can measure
progress over time.

As a country emerging from conflict, we have put
in place a number of peace and security initiatives. We
have adopted traditional and external mechanisms. We
have borrowed the South African Truth and
Reconciliation Commission model, which has a gender
chapter to it. I am pleased to say that during its work it
has accumulated data relevant to resolution 1325
(2000) that we will feed into our national policy
framework when the Commission's mandate comes to
a natural end next year.

Given our lack of capacity and resources, much
of the work on gender in Solomon Islands is externally
supported and heavily consultant-driven. That said, our
homegrown faith-based gender components have been
in existence for the past couple of decades. We are
assisted by the Regional Assistance Mission to the
Solomon Islands (RAMSI). Gender equality is factored
into the Mission, led by Australia and supported by
New Zealand and all our Pacific neighbours. I am
pleased to say that by the end of this year, RAMSI will
have a new coordinator, who is a Tongan professional
woman. My Government looks forward to working
with her.

United Nations relations with Solomon Islands
are by remote control through a regional office abroad.
Our concern is that the United Nations gender-
supported early warning system initiative, initiated
years back, unfortunately did not grow roots nationally
and went silent after completion of the project. In that
regard, we have been calling for an enhanced United
Nations presence in Solomon Islands to ensure that
there is a permanent partnership in transferring projects
within the country.

Nationally, two ministries are leading the charge
in implementing resolution 1325 (2000), namely, the
Ministry of National Unity, Reconciliation and Peace
and the Ministry of Women, Youth and Children's
Affairs. Their work on gender goes beyond resolution
1325 (2000), as has been clarified in the concept paper
(S/2011/654, annex). It covers the other resolutions,
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960
(2010).
3

My subregion is in a permanent state not of
conflict, but rather of adapting, mitigating and
addressing the various challenges of climate change
and combating poverty. We are in a transitional phase
of providing and improving women's access to food,
water, health, education and economic opportunities.
The results have been mixed and the problems are
growing. Five Pacific SIDS are classified as least
developed countries (LDCs).

The Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011-2020 has a
gender orientation to it. It calls for investment in the
productive sector within our countries, especially in
infrastructure, agriculture and energy, with the
ambitious goal to transform and graduate 50 per cent of
LDCs by 2020.

As my colleague from Vanuatu will state later on,
the Pacific SIDS are developing a regional action plan
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
which will be complemented by a national action plan.
On that note, Solomon Islands wishes to register its
appreciation to UN-Women, which has provided
financing to assist us in working on our national action
plan.

My delegation is mindful of the deep gaps within
resolution 1325 (2000), as it deals merely with peace
and security, not development. Our reading of the
resolution is that it engages women becoming agents of
change in conflict prevention, management and
peacebuilding, acting as fire-fighters putting out tires
without looking at the causes of conflict. Peace and
security, however, can be sustained by having a
sustainable development context to them.

Solomon Islands is also one of the 17 members of
the g-7, a small group of countries emerging from
conflict and having the objective of trying to improve
and reform global policies towards countries emerging
from conflict, focusing more on State peacebuilding
and State-building in relation to aid effectiveness. The
recommendations of the group will be presented at the
forthcoming High-level Forum on Aid Effectiveness, to
be held in Korea this year.

One of the root causes of conflict today is climate
change. The swallowing of land due to sea-level rise is
disempowering women landowners in matrilineal
societies in Solomon Islands. Challenges with regard to
drought, food and water are reversing the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals all around the
world.

Today - not tomorrow - we need the leadership
of the developed countries to adopt ambitious targets to
reduce greenhouse gases in order to stabilize
temperature increase to below 1.5 degrees Celsius.
Currently, we are on a path with weak pledges on the
table that will see the temperature rise to more than
5 to 7 degrees Celsius unless something drastic
happens in five weeks' time in Durban, South Africa.

Once we reach that point, resolution 1325 (2000)
will become irrelevant. I hope that this presentation
will contribute to providing us with an early warning
that will be reflected in the discussions to come.

