Mr. Buttigieg (Malta): I would like to thank the
German presidency for holding this annual open
debate on sexual violence in conflict. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2019/280).

Malta fully supports the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the contribution of civil society in
this area.

The annual open debate on sexual violence in
conflict provides a critical opportunity for taking stock
of this important aspect of the women and peace and
security agenda. Although the political momentum for
the fight against sexual violence has resulted in some
progress, we are still a long way from eliminating
that crime, partly because of the peace and security
challenges that the international community continues
to face, including mass migration and displacement and
rising levels of violent extremism and terrorism, conflict
and the proliferation of weapons. We must redouble our
efforts to sustain the momentum for change.

It is the responsibility of all States to support and
assist survivors and hold perpetrators to account. It
is unacceptable that perpetrators of conflict-related
sexual violence, both from States and from non-State
armed groups, should be allowed to continue to live
with impunity. The fight against impunity for conflict-
related sexual violence and the role of accountability as
an effective prevention tool are crucial to the women
and peace and security agenda. When sexual violence
is not addressed, reconciliation efforts and transitions
to more stable, secure and peaceful societies are
undermined, often resulting in long-lasting effects
on survivors and their families and communities. In
that regard, the importance of the role of civil society,
including women's rights groups, in peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconciliation efforts at the grass-roots
level cannot be stressed enough. We must continue to
support them.

The continued effective collaboration and
coordination between all Security Council instruments
for women and peace and security and conflict-related
sexual violence is very much welcome. Malta fully
supports the mandate of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

We agree that a holistic, survivor-centred approach
is needed when dealing with the fight against sexual
violence in conflict - one that is based on gender
equality, inclusive of all stakeholders, and can be
integrated in United Nations programmes and actions
across the board. By pursuing such an approach, which
is essential for the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, and by continuing our work
on gender equality and ensuring the full and effective
participation of women and girls in all spheres, we will
be able to make a real difference.

