Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova
align themselves with this statement.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her
briefing today and for the very important work she is
doing. I would also like to express my appreciation for
the briefing by Ms. Hamsatu Allamin on behalf of civil
society.
We welcome the report submitted by the Secretary-
General (S/2015/203) and note the updates to the annex
of the report. In that regard, we commend the work of
Ms. Bangura and of the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence, as well as of the UN Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. We emphasize the
importance of the focused recommendations made by
the Secretary-General for the thematic and country-
specific considerations of the Council.

Twenty years ago, the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action drew attention to the widespread
and unpunished use of sexual violence in conflict,
including the use of systematic rape as a tactic of war
and terrorism. It stated that the violations of the human
rights of women in situations of armed conflict were
violations of the fundamental principles of international
human rights law and humanitarian law. This principle
was reaffirmed in the Group of Eight Declaration
on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict.

The seventh report submitted to the Security
Council regrettably reflects the continuing concerning
scope of sexual violence, including recent alarming
trends, and its close linkages to ensuring broader
peace and security. We therefore underline the need to
make full use of the mechanisms and tools created by
the Security Council to combat and prevent conflict-
related sexual violence.

Conflict-related sexual violence is intrinsically
linked to broader, multiple and systematic gender-
based discrimination. It is facilitated by the absence of
women from formal or informal decision-making and
of the recognition of their full and equal human rights.
It leads to further forms of gender discrimination and
abuse, often as a result of steps taken to cope with
sexual violence or the threat thereof. Discrimination
against women and girls also restricts the access of
survivors to assistance and services and can lead to
revictimization. The implementation of the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and the Beijing Platform are essential
elements in addressing conflict-related sexual violence.

Women need to meaningfully participate in decisions
and policymaking with regard to peace and security, in
line with the main objectives of resolution 1325 (2000),
including to address the underlying causes for sexual

Violence in conflict and ensure adequate protection
measures.

The continued collection of timely information
and of training remain crucial to efforts to combat
sexual Violence, including the detection of early-
warning signs. We welcome the contribution of women
protection advisers to the implementation of the
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements, and
continue to support their further deployment, alongside
gender advisers, in United Nations missions. Equally,
we need measures to ensure the safety of those who
face reprisals and intimidation because of their work to
help the survivors of sexual violence or report on such
crimes.

We need to end impunity for sexual violence-related
crimes. We emphasize the significant advancement
in international law made by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court as well as non-permanent
international criminal tribunals in combating sexual
Violence in conflict. We underline the need for rapid
and effective investigation and documentation of these
crimes, and welcome the increased use of the Justice
Rapid Response-UN Women special Justice Experts
Roster.

The Secretary-General describes the alarming
trend of the use of sexual violence by violent extremist
groups, including for religious or ethnic persecution,
and its integral linkage to their strategic objectives
and ideology, including its use to advance recruitment,
funding, intelligence gathering, conversion, and
the destruction or change of community ties. The
empowerment of women and girls and respect for their
human rights need to be a part of efforts to counter
violent extremism.

Let me just say a few words on European Union
actions in that regard. The European Union continues
to implement its dedicated policy on women and peace
and security, including through close cooperation with
other international and regional organizations. Let me
also point out that 17 of our 28 member States have
adopted national action plans on resolution 1325 (2000).

The European Union continues to follow up the
2014 Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Call to Action on Protecting Girls and Women
in Emergencies. At the end of last year, the European
Union adopted a guide to practical actions at the EU
level for ending sexual violence in conflict, which
includes 36 concrete initiatives, ranging from human
rights to conflict prevention and humanitarian aid.

We continue to support initiatives to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) around the world. Those
efforts include support to the programme for women's
empowerment included in the Trust Fund for the Central
African Republic and aimed at empowering women
victims of violence, including through the provision of
health services and support to access justice. We are
also launching a project in the Democratic Republic of
Congo on improving the provision of care to victims of
sexual violence and continue to support the work of the
Panzi hospital there, headed by Dr. Denis Mukwege,
who was awarded the Sakharov Prize by the European
Parliament in 2014.

The EU continues to support the capacity of civil
society and women's organizations as key partners
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
EU has so far committed over €34 million to protect
victims of the Syrian crisis, including for gender-based
Violence and child-protection activities. We welcomed
the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty, which has
been signed by all and ratified by almost all member
States of the EU.

In conclusion, we are looking forward and
contributing to this year's high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including the
global study. As the preparations for the review will be
conducted in parallel with the peacebuilding review and
the review of peace operations, we have an opportunity
to incorporate a strengthened gender dimension into
the United Nations peace and security architecture.

