The Secretary-General: Let me thank and
congratulate the presidency of the Security Council for
its initiative in holding this meeting on women and
armed conflict. The theme chosen is crucial, for it
brings together two vital parts of the United Nations
mission. The Charter tells us that the Organization was
created "to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war". It also proclaims the equal rights of
men and women. We must live up to both challenges or
we shall not succeed fully in either.

As this Council knows better than anyone, the
nature of conflict has changed a great deal in the
decades since our Charter was written. The age of
inter-State wars has been replaced by the age of ethnic
conflict. Militias have multiplied, and small arms have
proliferated. International law has been flouted.
Civilians not only make up the majority of victims;
they are increasingly the targets of conflict. From rape
and displacement to the denial of the right to food and
health care, women bear more than their fair share of
the suffering.

But women, who know the price of conflict so
well, are also often better equipped than men to prevent
or resolve it. For generations women have served as
peace educators, both in their families and in their
societies. They have proved instrumental in building
bridges rather than walls. They have been crucial in
preserving social order when communities have
collapsed.

We in the United Nations know at first hand the
invaluable support women provide to our
peacekeepers, by organizing committees, non-
governmental organizations and church groups that
help ease tensions and by persuading their menfolk to
accept peace. Partly for that reason, we are making
special efforts to recruit more women for our
peacekeeping and peacemaking missions, and to make
all our operations more aware of gender issues.

The United Nations has learned the hard way that
peace and security depends on rapid response to early
indications of conflict. We know that conflict
prevention requires imaginative strategies. We know
that conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peace-
building call for creative and flexible approaches. In all
these areas, we have seen examples of women playing
an important role - not least on my own continent,
Africa.

And yet the potential contribution of women to
peace and security remains severely under-valued.
Women are still grossly under-represented at the
decision-making level, from conflict prevention to
conflict resolution to post-conflict reconciliation.

We are here today because we are determined to
change that, and because we know that changing it is
the responsibility of all of us - men and women alike.
This Council, in its statement on International
Women's Day this year, acknowledged that women and
girls are particularly affected by the consequences of
armed conflict. The Council recognized that peace is
inextricably linked to equality between men and
women and it declared that maintaining and promoting
peace and security require women's equal participation
in decision-making.

I am here today to ask the Council to do
everything in its power to translate that statement into
action; to help ensure that women and girls in conflict
situations are protected, that perpetrators of violence
against women in conflict are brought to justice, and
that women are able to take their rightful and equal
place at the decision-making table on questions of
peace and security. I am confident that Ms. King, Ms.
Heyzer and others who will speak here today will help
show the way.
