Mr. Antonio (African Union): Mr. President, on
behalf of the African Union, I wish to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council,
and I join previous speakers in commending you for
organizing this open debate. Our appreciation also goes
to Ambassador Rice for the excellent work she has
done during the month of September. We are also

grateful to the various speakers who briefed the
Council this morning.

As I am participating in a Council meeting for the
first time in my new capacity as Acting Permanent
Observer of the African Union, I would like to take this
opportunity to state our gratitude to the Council for the
support and cooperation accorded my predecessor,
Mrs. Lila Ratsif Andrihamanana. The African Union
also deeply appreciates the attention this Council
continues to devote to issues of concern to Africa, and
I look forward to working with the Council.

The African Union welcomes open meetings such
as the one we are holding today, since this enables us
to share information on successes, opportunities and
lessons learned and to reflect together on the new
synergies needed to improve the content and delivery
of concrete action in the field. In this connection and in
support of the earlier statement by the Netherlands, the
African Union welcomes as a major step forward
General Assembly resolution 63/311 authorizing the
establishment of a composite agency on gender
equality to be headed by an Under-Secretary-General,
and urges the Security Council to lend its full support
to the Secretary-General's efforts in this area in the
coming period.

We are also pleased that next year's tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) coincides with
the start of the African Women's Decade, 2010-2020,
declared by the Assembly of the African Union in
January 2009, and which we hope will also open other
avenues for further strengthening cooperation between
our two organizations in working toward greater
gender equality.

Turning to the specific topic of today's debate,
the African Union has continued to develop specific
policies and institutional capacity for addressing the
challenges women face during conflict and its
aftermath. Key measures taken include the
strengthening of the African Women's Committee on
Peace and Development and the adoption of the
African Union Gender Policy by the Assembly of the
Union in January this year. The Policy stresses the
need to reinforce respect, equality and the human
dignity of men and women in all areas, and to enforce
zero tolerance for gender-based violence, sexual
harassment, assault, rape, gender stereotyping, sexism
and abusive language, in particular in situations of
conflict. It further stresses the need to ensure adequate
sanction and punishment for such acts, and underscores
the need for the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). It also stresses that the Paris Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups should be used as the basis for
programmatic interventions in Africa, which must
include measures to prevent sexual abuse as a weapon
in armed conflict.

The African Union Gender Policy also calls for
the mobilization of women leaders to participate in
peace mediation and related processes, an objective
that has been mentioned by many speakers in this open
debate. The African Union is further committed under
the Policy to working to address human and drug
trafficking and to articulate gender perspectives
relating to child labour, prostitution and abuse.

I should now like to focus on the opportunities
and challenges which lie on the path ahead, in
particular from the perspective of peace and security.
First, we have been greatly honoured by the leadership
and important contributions of women in Member
States such as Mozambique, Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Networks of
women have also been involved in the northern Uganda
peace talks in Juba and in ongoing efforts for lasting
peace and security in the Sudan and Somalia. However,
I should like to underscore the need to strengthen the
involvement of women in such processes. Concrete
actions must be taken to ensure that the lessons learnt
thus far are fully integrated into the cooperative efforts
being made by the United Nations and regional
organizations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. This includes the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations at all levels.
Secondly, we in the African Union face the
challenge of ensuring that our emerging peace and
security architecture - which includes the African
Standby Force, the Continental Early Warning System,
the Panel of the Wise and our subregional
arrangements for peace and security - adequately
reflect our vision for women and peace and security.
We are determined to address this challenge, and
continue to count on the support of the Security
Council and our international partners in this respect.

Finally, as part of ongoing efforts to strengthen
the mobilization of resources and support peacekeeping
operations conducted by regional organizations such as
the African Union, we would like to underscore the
importance of ensuring that efforts centred on women
and peace and security are adequately covered in the
strategies to be developed. With these few remarks, I
wish to reaffirm our commitment to cooperation with
the United Nations and our international partners on
this matter and other questions of common interest.

