Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): Three years
ago, the Security Council took a bold stance on the role
of women in conflict by adopting resolution 1325
(2000). It recognized that women and girls bear the
brunt of armed conflict and also that they are an
essential part of any lasting solution. This has
significant implications for our peacekeeping
operations and calls for a radical change in the way we
do our work.

I welcome the opportunity offered us today to
take stock of the efforts made to date to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) in peacekeeping operations and
to highlight some of the challenges facing us in the
year to come. The Senior Gender Adviser of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), Ms. Amy Smythe,
will later speak on the practical realities of
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and will provide
a perspective from the field level in the Democratic
Republic of Congo on this issue. I would like also to
acknowledge the contributions received from our
partners in the United Nations system, as well as from
non-governmental organizations, for this presentation.

As we all know, women and girls do not
experience conflict in the same way as men and boys.
Women and girls suffer disproportionately in time of
war. Pre-existing inequalities are magnified and
exacerbated by conflict and social networks break
down, making women and girls highly vulnerable to
sexual violence and exploitation. We have learned that
when a peacekeeping operation is deployed in such an
environment, out first duty is to listen to the voices of
the victims. Only in this way can we best understand
how effectively to help women and girls and how to lay
down the foundations for a lasting peace.

Women are also a source of strength and
inspiration in our struggle. We recognize the
tremendous impact that they can have when their
knowledge, skills and energy are harnessed in the name
of peace and of rebuilding a country devastated by war.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
greatly benefited from the support it has received from
such agencies as United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM), which have strong links with the
national women's networks that exist in many
countries.

Over the past 12 months, the Department has
taken concrete steps to implement resolution 1325
(2000). This is particularly true in the context of
multidimensional peacekeeping operations such as
those in Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kosovo, Timor-Leste and Afghanistan. In all of
those missions, gender experts - working either alone
or as part of a larger gender affairs unit - are playing
an active and decisive role, putting gender issues at the
centre of peacekeeping.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
been focusing its efforts in particular on five main
areas highlighted in resolution 1325 (2000): first,
increasing the number of women in peacekeeping
operations; secondly, integrating a gender perspective
into peacekeeping operations; thirdly, training in
gender awareness and HIV/AIDS issues; fourthly,
strengthening discipline for peacekeeping personnel,
both through effective preventive action and by a firm
response to any misconduct; and fifthly, combating
trafficking in human beings.

(spoke in English)

Let me start with the issue of gender balance
among peacekeeping personnel. The importance of
having equal numbers of men and women on our staff
at all levels of the Organization is a given. But we need
to lead by example. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) often finds itself in the awkward
position of advocating for a higher percentage of
women in national police forces than it has in its own
ranks.

Women make up 4 per cent of total civilian police
personnel in DPKO missions, and figures are equally
low for the military. I urge Member States to continue
and intensify their efforts to provide more women
civilian police and military personnel to peacekeeping
operations. I also call for the inclusion of women and
men with experience in gender-based crimes to help us
address the high rates of violence against women that
are common in post-conflict situations.

DPKO is addressing this challenge in-house. We
have started, on a pilot basis, to encourage more
women applicants by targeting professional women's
associations with our vacancy announcements. At the
Director level and above, the number of women has
increased fourfold over the past year. In the 15 DPKO
peacekeeping missions, women currently represent one
third of all professional staff. We recognize, however,
that our figures offer no ground for complacency.
DPKO intends to be more effective in the coming year
in identifying suitable women candidates for senior
positions and in recruiting professional-level women
for missions.

But, all too often, gender mainstreaming is
reduced to an accountancy exercise in which managers
focus on the number of women on their staff. We tend
to overlook the need to include a gender dimension in
the programmes they are managing. Gender balance is
essential, but it is only half of the story. We also need
to make sure that our programmes take into account the
different needs of women and men, and that they tap
into their strengths. Let me give an example of how
looking at our disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme in Sierra Leone from a gender
perspective has made it more effective.

In the past, adult male ex-combatants were the
only focus of our attention. They were the ones
registered and given a package of benefits to help them
return to civilian life. This meant that women who
either were ex-combatants or were working in support
roles such as cooks, as well as wives - or even girls
abducted and forced to work as sexual slaves - were
being left out of the picture. Now, our help is also
directed towards those women and girls, and is tailored
to meet such special needs as trauma counselling for
abducted girls who worked as sexual slaves.

To help demystify gender mainstreaming, a
number of practical field manuals are being produced.
A gender resource package is in the final stages of
being developed. It will cover a wide range of topics,
from general information on gender concepts and
practical checklists highlighting gender issues in
peacekeeping, to guidelines on establishing gender
units in the field. In addition, in the coming year we
will be producing a field manual on gender issues for
military commanders, as well as one on gender issues
in mine action.

I would like to thank Member States for having
approved, this year, the post of Gender Advisor, based
at DPKO headquarters. We have temporarily filled the
position, until the recruitment of the post is concluded
early next year. The Gender Advisor has already begun
to assist us in coordinating our efforts on gender issues
in a more effective way and in facilitating cross-
regional learning. One of her first tasks will be to take
stock of all the positive efforts made to date in the area
of gender mainstreaming, identify some of the main
gaps and help us identify a comprehensive strategy to
move forward. A network of gender focal points will
also be established in the coming year to assist in
mainstreaming efforts.

I would now like to turn to gender mainstreaming
in missions. Some peacekeeping operations have
restrictive mandates that focus on military tasks, and
opportunities for gender mainstreaming in such
missions are limited. However, the scope for gender
mainstreaming is much broader in multidimensional
peacekeeping operations. At present, we have gender
advisors or specialists in five multidimensional
missions: in Kosovo, Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Timor-Leste and Afghanistan.
In addition, gender advisor posts have been established
for Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.

Time and time again, we have seen that gender
affairs units or gender specialists in missions improve a
mission's effectiveness in discharging its mandate and
in helping us to have a light footprint. For instance, in
Kosovo, where the mission has executive and
legislative responsibilities, the Senior Gender Advisor
has helped the transitional Government draft a law on
gender equality. That law will have a lasting, positive
impact on the lives of women and girls, and the process
has provided the Kosovar transitional administration
with the skills to carry out legal reform from a gender
perspective, including after the United Nations Interim
Mission in Kosovo is gone.

In Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, DPKO gender
advisors are improving the quality of the missions'
work by training national police forces in how best to
handle gender-based crimes, especially domestic
violence. In Afghanistan, gender analysis has helped
the mission plan more inclusive elections. The
mission's electoral unit analysed the potential
challenges relating to the registration of women. It is
now introducing a number of measures to facilitate
women's participation in elections, such as separate
registration facilities for women. In Georgia, where
there is no full-time gender specialist, many important
efforts to mainstream gender into programmes have
still gone ahead. For instance, the mission there is
facilitating the participation of women from Abkhazia
in conflict resolution and peace-building efforts.
Giving members these examples may make
gender mainstreaming sound easy, but it is not. Our
gender experts in the missions repeatedly express their
frustration about the lip service paid to gender issues.
We need to move beyond empty words and actually
practice what we preach. I intend to ensure that all
future, multidimensional peacekeeping operations
include strong gender expertise, for instance in the
form of a gender affairs unit that has access to senior-
level decision-making in all areas of the mission's
work. I hope that Member States will support that
effort.

Training on gender awareness and HIV/AIDS is
another key element of resolution 1325 (2000). DPKO
has disseminated a generic "Gender and Peacekeeping"
training manual to all peacekeeping missions and to
Member States. In the past year, nine "train the
trainers" courses have been conducted by DPKO for
more than 350 training officers from Member States. I
urge Member States to ensure that this training package
is included in all pro-deployment training for both
military and civilian police. On my side, I will ensure
that gender training is included in all induction courses
for new personnel.

DPKO continues to prevent and respond to the
problem of HIV/AIDS in peacekeeping operations. At
present, HIV/AIDS Policy Officers are deployed in
four field missions: the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor. The focus in
the past year has been on prevention through training,
often carried out in collaboration with United Nations
and national partners. For instance, in Sierra Leone,
DPKO, together with the United Nations Population
Fund and the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, conducted four workshops in the past year on
HIV/AIDS, gender and human rights for military and
civilian peacekeepers. In Timor-Leste, the mission has
provided voluntary, confidential HIV counselling and
testing since February 2003.

The grave allegations of sexual abuse and
exploitation of refugees and internally displaced
women and children by humanitarian workers and
peacekeepers, which first arose in West Africa, have
strengthened DPKO's resolve to uphold a zero-
tolerance stance aimed at preventing and effectively
responding to this very serious problem, which not
only violates human rights, but also undermines the
very core of our mission in peacekeeping. Following a
thorough review of existing policies and procedures on
disciplinary issues for all categories of personnel, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
provided all missions in July of this year with an
updated set of disciplinary directives. These cover the
issue of sexual abuse and exploitation as well as other
types of serious misconduct. In the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), senior managers recently
received training on the directives. In the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), a
Personnel Conduct Committee receives and
investigates allegations of sexual abuse and
exploitation by peacekeeping personnel, and a
telephone hotline has been set up for reporting
incidents of misconduct.

In the coming year, DPKO will ensure that each
mission has an active strategy to prevent and respond
to the problems of sexual abuse and exploitation. Each
mission will appoint a senior focal point to receive
complaints of misconduct by peacekeeping personnel.
DPKO will also continue to work on ensuring that
senior managers in missions know how to use and
apply the disciplinary directives, and that they have the
in-mission capacity to investigate allegations. Training,
reporting and follow-up mechanisms will also be
strengthened. Lastly, DPKO will review existing efforts
to prevent and respond to sexual abuse and
exploitation, and identify good practices for replication
elsewhere.

While we can - and should - do all of these
things, we need your support to make a real difference.
Personnel contributed for service in a peacekeeping
operation are required to abide by the highest standards
of integrity while in service for the United Nations. We
expect contributing States to provide pro-deployment
briefings to all of their personnel on these standards
and to vigorously pursue any breaches. We also seek
systematic feedback on action taken by Member States
against peacekeepers repatriated for serious
misconduct.

Before closing, I would like to touch briefly on
the issue of trafficking of women. We all recognize that
this is a complex, multifaceted problem that has links
to organized crime networks. Experience also teaches
us that there is no single, easy solution to this problem.
DPKO is currently undertaking a lessons-learned study
on our anti-trafficking programmes in Bosnia and
Kosovo. The results of this study will help us identify
best practices and some lessons learned in tackling the
trafficking of women.
We have made real progress on gender
mainstreaming in our peacekeeping operations. Much
of it is due to the presence of full time gender advisers.
We acknowledge that there is a long road ahead of us,
and that gender mainstreaming in post-conflict
environments is not easy. It will take a concerted effort
of will. We must learn to see gender mainstreaming in
peacekeeping not as an afterthought, but as the key to
any peacekeeping mission's success.

We look forward to strong collaboration with
Member States as well as with our United Nations and
non-governmental organization partners to ensure that
peacekeeping operations bring lasting and positive
changes to the lives of women and girls and their
communities.

