Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this debate on
such an important issue. I thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/181). I thank Ms. Bangura, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Rhoda Misak for
their statements, and I welcome their tremendous work

in the fight against sexual violence.

Women are routinely subjected, to different
degrees in various societies, to physical, sexual and
psychological violence, and are even further victimized
in situations of conflict to all sorts of brutal aggression.
Despite several years of intensive action on the part
of the international community, whose commitment
and determination to fight sexual violence I welcome,
women unfortunately continue to be victims of such
violence the world over, wherever conflicts occur. The
number of countries cited in the report of the Secretary-
General is tangible proof of this.

States must uphold their obligations to prosecute
those who perpetrate such violence and ensure that the
victims of sexual violence enjoy equal protection under
the law and access to justice. There can be no place for
impunity within frameworks seeking to achieve lasting
peace, justice, and national truth and reconciliation.
When national judicial systems fail, the perpetrators
of sexual violence should be subject to prosecution
under international criminal justice, the jurisprudence
of which when it comes to such violence represents a
major step forward. Chad believes that all States are
obligated to implement the principle of zero tolerance
when it comes to sexual violence against women and
girls. In this regard, we would like to welcome the
stringent zero -olerance policy applied by the United
Nations regarding cases of sexual violence perpetrated
by members of peacekeeping contingents.

The repercussions of sexual violence for women
and their loved ones are enormous, and the victims
are changed for life by what they have suffered. Not
only do they often find themselves left alone with no
medical or psychosocial assistance, but they are obliged
to remain silent in the face of threats against them
and any witnesses. The fight against sexual violence
in conflict requires victims and witnesses to be
protected so as to allow them to report the perpetrators
of these crimes. Likewise, efforts should incorporate
information, training and awareness-raising to enhance
the prevention of sexual violence through capacity-
building for States and other relevant stakeholders. In
this regard, Chad welcomes the crucial role played by
the United Nations and civil society, and encourages
them to strengthen their warning systems and their
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
with a view to fine-tuning a comprehensive response to
issues related to sexual violence.

The wake-up calls issued by the adoption of
the various resolutions of sexual Violence marked
significant progress that must be further strengthened
by the effective implementation of all of the measures
they provide for. Chad recognizes the central role
women can play in efforts towards peace and security
in situations of conflict. Their active participation at
all levels of decision-making and in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts, in brokering peace and in post-
conflict peacebuilding is of great importance.

In conclusion, I must underscore that the ongoing
struggle towards peace and security to build a better
future for the world can attain its goals only if all
forms of violence against women in general, and sexual
violence in conflict in particular - which are war
crimes and crimes against humanity - are eradicated.

