Mr. Jfirgenson (Estonia): Ithankyou, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting on this vital topic. We
were impressed by the comprehensive statements by
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, Special
Representative Pramila Patten and Ms. Razia Sultana.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and
reiterates its commitment to fighting gender-based
violence, including sexual violence.

Sexual violence is among the gravest violations
of human rights. Its impact ranges from immediate to
multiple long-term physical and mental consequences
for women and girls, men and boys. It also has very
negative consequences for their families, communities,
societies and countries as a whole. But it is not inevitable.
There are ways to prevent it. We fully support the
Secretary- General's recommendation in his latest report
(S/2018/250) to give due consideration to early-warning
signs of sexual violence when monitoring conflict
situations. If we fail to act early, the human, political
and economic costs can be devastating, as we know all
too well. That calls for a more alert, coordinated and
comprehensive approach by States Members and the
United Nations system.

It is crucial to support survivors of sexual violence
with adequate services so that they can rebuild their
lives. Survivors should also always be given the option
of documenting their cases for future accountability
processes. In that regard, the role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in ensuring the effective
investigation and prosecution of sexual and gender-
based crimes cannot be emphasized enough. The work
of UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response is also
important, since its joint expert roster has been an
effective tool for deploying experts to investigate and
document sexual violence in conflict-driven zones.
Estonia is fully committed to tackling gender-
based violence and has put in place a comprehensive
development strategy for the period from 2015 to 2020
for reducing violence domestically. It lays out concrete
activities for reducing and preventing violence in its
various forms, including sexual violence. Globally,
Estonia has been a strong supporter of Special
Representative Pramila Patten and her mandate. We
are also proud to be a consistent contributor to the ICC
Trust Fund for Victims, which alleviates suffering for
survivors of violence.

I would also like to emphasize the important role
of civil society. While intergovernmental cooperation
is extremely significant, we need to ensure that
everyone is heard. Civil-society and non-governmental
organizations, and women's organizations in particular,
can provide new insight and data that could otherwise
be missed. It is therefore very important to ensure that
non-governmental organizations have larger platforms
and more access to United Nations meetings and
forums. That would unquestionably help us to ensure
that every detail is accounted for in achieving our goals
related to ending conflict-related sexual violence.

Our experience has shown that national action plans
for implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, are essential in raising awareness
of the need for the inclusion of women in conflict
prevention and sustainable peacebuilding. Estonia is
currently implementing its second national action plan,
which was created and is being implemented jointly
with non-governmental organizations.

A fundamental lesson that we have learned from
experience and from the Secretary-General's reports
is the sheer level of detail that we have to deal with
in addressing sexual violence in conflict-driven zones.
Let us work together, domestically and globally, to put
an end to sexual violence forever.

