Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish):
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union and wishes to make
the following statement in its national capacity.

First of all, taking advantage of the fact that the
President of the Government of Spain is presiding over
the Security Council, I would like to express, on behalf
of Ukraine, our sincere gratitude and appreciation for
Spain's contribution to the work of the Council and its
dedication and effectiveness during these two years.
The active participation of Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi and his team on such important issues on the
Council's agenda, such as the fight against terrorism,
non-proliferation and the promotion of human rights,
serves as an example for permanent and non-permanent
members of the Council.

In particular, we appreciate the consistent and
persistent position of Spain in the promotion of gender
equality. Resolution 2242 (2015), the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security, which was
established by the delegations of Spain and Great
Britain, and the launch of the Network of National
Coordinators for Women and Peace and Security are
just a few of the examples of real achievements made
by Spain to improve the efficiency of the Organization,
particularly of the Security Council
I would also like to emphasize the importance ofthe
topic proposed for discussion in today's open debate.
The issue of human trafficking has been the focus
of attention of the United Nations in recent decades.
The Palermo Protocol of 2000 and the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons of 2010 are
cornerstones and key documents for all States Members
of the Organization. Nonetheless, in recent years, we
have observed an evolution of human trafficking,
especially in situations of conflict and post-conflict.
In different parts of the world affected by conflict,
sexual violence is used as a destructive tactic of war
or terrorism, as well as one of the key elements of the
ideology and activities of extremist groups, such as
Boko Haram and Da'esh. The terrorist groups that Ijust
mentioned are openly promoting human trafficking as
part of their military strategy or as a source of funding.
That is why the connection between phenomena like
human trafficking, sexual violence in conflict situations
and the activities of terrorist organizations requires
special attention from the Security Council.

The adoption of resolution 2331 (2016) is a timely
measure that demonstrates the ability of the Security
Council to respond to the new challenges and threats
that arise in the area of peace and security. We cannot
close our eyes in the face of the situation on the ground.
We cannot wait for the number of victims of sexual
exploitation and sexual violence related to trafficking
to reach the terrible numbers of the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina or the genocide in Rwanda.

A constant problem is the underestimation of data
on sexual violence in conflicts. That is mainly because
of stigma, fear ofreprisals, lack of access for monitoring
and inadequate means to ensure accountability. That is
why it is important that the resolution adopted today be
a new tool for the Security Council that helps facilitate
the assessment of the situation on the ground in conflict
zones and post-conflict situations. That will allow us to
study and reflect on in future reports of the Secretary-
General the problem of the connection between
human trafficking and the activities of traffickers and
terrorist groups.

Ukraine strongly supports international efforts to
combat all forms of human rights violations and abuses
in conflict and post-conflict situations. The fight

against trafficking in persons was identified as one of
the priorities of the Government of Ukraine in the area
of the protection of human rights.

At the same time, I would like to reiterate my
country's request to include in the respective mandates
of the Organization consideration of the problem of
sexual violence in the Ukrainian territories temporarily
occupied by Russia. In view of the fact that Ukraine's
police and security agencies do not have access to the
territory of Crimea, which is occupied by Russia, or
to certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
which are controlled by terrorists supported by Russia,
we must resolve the problem of the verification and
documentation of cases of sexual violence in those
territories in order to provide support and assistance
to victims.

I am convinced that General Assembly resolution
71/202, adopted yesterday, on human rights in the
temporarily occupied territory of Crimea provides the
United Nations with the necessary authority to compel
Russia to fulfil its responsibilities as an occupying
Power, as it is defined in the resolution. It is sad that
we are talking about a country that, as a permanent
member of the Security Council, must assume special
responsibility to fulfil the Charter of the United
Nations, even though it became a State Member of the
United Nations only 25 years ago.

Finally, I would like to mention another issue of
great importance to all ofus, that is, accountability and
the prosecution of perpetrators of human trafficking
and crimes of sexual violence in conflict. The high
level of impunity for those who commit such crimes
in conflict is unacceptable, as the repetition of those
crimes creates a vicious cycle of criminality. Together
with the provision of psychological, social and medical
support to victims, we consider the fight against
impunity a priority.

