Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): 1 would first like to
thank Spain for convening this important open debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2015/716) and to express my gratitude to
all the briefers for their constructive insights into the
progress made over the past 15 years and the challenges
that remain in implementing the agenda on women and
peace and security.

I would like to associate my remarks with the
statement to be delivered tomorrow by the representative
of Viet Nam on behalf of the member countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

It is a long-established fact that gender issues cut
across many sectors and that focusing on them can
help us to attain our peace, development and human
rights objectives. Since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), 15 years ago, many thematic discussions and
resolutions on gender have evolved from it, such as
those on small arms, counter-terrorism, peacekeeping
and the protection of civilians. It is particularly
noteworthy that peacekeeping missions have integrated
gender perspectives into their training, operations and
reporting. Nevertheless, the fact remains that women
and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict situations
are still unduly affected and underrepresented, even
with the addition of all the resolutions on women and
peace and security adopted subsequently and aimed
at strengthening action on resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as the creation of relevant mechanisms within
the United Nations. Ultimately, the best measure of
progress is when policy gains are more meaningfully
and tangibly translated into action on the ground.

Moving forward, and building on the momentum
created by the high-level review of the past 15 years,
I would like to suggest that the Council focus on five
areas. First, it should ensure that women have the access
and the capacity they need to participate meaningfully
in conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacebuilding
and decision-making processes in public life generally.
Secondly, it should support advocacy campaigns aimed
at reaching out and empowering society to protect
women and girls and address their specific needs. All
actors and stakeholders, especially at the community
level, should be able to translate international
frameworks on protecting women and girls in conflict-
and post-conflict-related situations into action on the
ground.

Thirdly, it should empower women and girls to
be agents for change and peace rather than merely
focusing on their vulnerability as victims. Fourthly, it
should put monitoring and evaluation mechanisms in
place in the United Nations system designed to provide
an integrated perspective on implementing resolution
1325 (2000), with the aim of supporting implementation
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action. Fifthly, it should
continue to encourage synergy with various relevant
initiatives, including any developed outside the United
Nations framework, and to galvanize support from
diverse actors, including those working in the field, in
order to promote gender equality and strengthen the
protection of women and girls in armed conflict.

As a major peacekeeping contributor, Indonesia
remains a strong supporter of the Security Council
resolutions that protect and empower women and girls
in situations of armed conflict. Indonesian military
and police units are currently deployed in nine
United Nations operations, totalling more than 1,600
personnel. The Government of Indonesia eventually
aims to contribute 4,000 Indonesian peacekeepers,
including females, and has established a peacekeeping
training centre to serve as a national and regional hub
for integrated peacekeeping training and a centre of
excellence. Gender perspectives have already been
embedded in their training curriculums and syllabuses.

Indonesia will continue to support the Council's
deliberations on this agenda item and remains resolved
to work with the Council, the United Nations, Member
States and all actors in order to empower women and
girls as agents for change and peace.

