The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Belarus, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Malawi, Mozambique, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Singapore,
South Africa, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Wensley
(Australia), Mr. Ling (Belarus), Mr. Simonovic'
(Croatia), Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus), Mr. Atoki
(Democratic Republic of the Congo),
Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt), Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia),
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala), Mr. Sharma (India),
Mr. Widodo (Indonesia), Mr. Akasaka (Japan),
Ms. Fritsche (Liechtenstein), Mr. Juwayeyi
(Malawi), Mr. Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Powles
(New Zealand), Mr. Brattskar (Norway),
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr. Sun Joun-Yung
(Republic ofKorea), Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Mwakawago (United
Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. Jokonya
(Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for them at
the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Angela King, Assistant Secretary-
General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer,
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. King to take a seat at the Council
table.

I invite Ms. Heyzer to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the council to document S/2000/693, which contains
the text of a letter dated 12 July 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Namibia to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting the Windhoek Declaration and the
Namibia Plan of Action on Mainstreaming a Gender
Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Support
Operations.

I now invite members of the Council to view a
short video presentation on women and peace.

A video tape was played in the Council Chamber.


The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General, my friend and brother, Kofi Annan.


