Mr. Mazeiks (Latvia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Latvia and Estonia. I thank
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General of
Humanitarian Affairs; Ms. Helen Durham, Director
on International Law and Policy at the International
Committee ofthe Red Cross, and Ms. Ilwad Elman ofthe
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
for their statements. I also thank the Chilean presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this debate and
focusing on the protection challenges faced by women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Estonia and Latvia align themselves with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.

Remarkable achievements have been made at the
normative level to operationalize the women and peace
and security agenda. Women's protection has also been
at the centre of many Security Council deliberations.
However, challenges lie at the implementation level
and in sustaining progress. We look forward to the
high-level review and the global study on progress and
obstacles in implementing resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as the follow-up resolutions. The year 2015 will
be an important one for the advancement of women's
rights due to the convergence of the review with other
global policy events, such as the post-2015 development
agenda and the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and the Platform for Action. We should
take full advantage of those opportunities to recommit
ourselves to the women and peace and security agenda,
and to address the specific needs and challenges faced
by women and girls, including in conflict and post-
conflict settings. Latvia and Estonia will spare no
effort in facilitating progress in that regard.

The increase in conflicts and violent extremism
over the past year has had a dramatic impact on
civilians, in particular on women and girls. Last
Saturday's barbaric shelling of Mariupol by terrorists,
in which 30 innocent civilians perished - two-thirds
of them women and children - is a grim reminder
of why our work on this issue must move forward.
The perpetrators of that senseless attack and their
supporters must face the consequences. We are also
concerned about the continued incidence of sexual and
gender-based violence, and the targeted attacks against
women and girls and those defending their rights. We
welcome the increased use of the human rights- and
sexual violence-related criteria in the Security Council
sanctions regimes. All parties to armed conflict should
comply with international humanitarian and human
rights law.

We stress that all crimes of sexual violence
should be prosecuted and punished under national
and international law. Accountability is an important
element in enhancing the compliance of parties to
armed conflict with their international obligations;
it is equally important for bringing justice to victims
of those crimes. National authorities have a primary
responsibility to provide accountability for serious
human rights violations; at the same time, the
International Criminal Court continues to play a crucial
role if they are unable or unwilling to do so.

Latvia and Estonia support efforts to mainstream
gender aspects into peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping operations need to be equipped with
robust mandates that put the protection of civilians,
including the prevention of sexual and gender-based
violence, at their core. The key elements ofthe effective
implementation of those mandates are, among others,
appropriate training for peacekeeping personnel and
their senior mission leadership; effective coordination
among all mission components and between
peacekeeping operations and other United Nations
actors on the ground; as well as close cooperation with
the local population, civil society organizations and
local institutions. It is also particularly important that
women's rights violations be adequately reflected in the
periodic reports of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions to the Security Council. We welcome
efforts to build capacity for gender-sensitive conflict
analysis and the use of sex-disaggregated data.

Latvia and Estonia strongly believe that issues
related to the women and peace and security agenda
should be fully integrated into the various reviews
currently being undertaken by the United Nations
on peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sanctions. We
welcome the Secretary-General's Rights Up Front
initiative to develop a coherent approach to human
rights issues throughout the United Nations system and
to strengthen early warning and preventive capabilities.

In a year when several global processes provide an
opportunity to put priorities and commitments on gender
equality at the centre of the international and national
agendas, we cannot afford to backslide on women's
rights. Gender equality and women's empowerment are
fundamental to addressing security challenges faced
by women. Women's representation and participation at
all stages and levels of decision-making in conflict and
post-conflict settings are essential to voicing women's
rights and concerns early on, and to ensuring their
protection.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the commitment of
both Latvia and Estonia to gender equality and women's
empowerment, and their readiness to contribute to all
ongoing processes to ensure that sustainable progress is
made so that women and girls can enjoy all their human
rights.

