Ms. Vanda Pignato (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to tell the Council, very briefly,
about the situation in El Salvador with regard to sexual
violence and gender-based violence in general, 21 years
after the signing of the peace agreements that brought
our past armed conflict to an end.

As is well known and has been repeated here on
many occasions, post-conflict societies also face
significant challenges in combating and eliminating
sexual violence. That is an extensive phenomenon;
it is deeply rooted in our societies and predates the
conditions that have led to armed conflict.

After the end of the civil war, El Salvador lived
through two decades in which gender policies and
attention to human rights violations were not high on the
Government's agenda. To be honest, little, if anything,
was done to ensure access to justice by victims and to
fight impunity, and even less to establish measures that
would lead to reparations for victims.

We all know very well that, after the chaos of armed
conflict, the fundamental institutions of a country are
left in a general state of weakness and dependency, with
limited and low levels ofeconomic and human resources.
Such countries usually take a long time to achieve the
strengthening oftheir institutions to a degree that would
allow them to be functional at an acceptable level. That
is the situation in which El Salvador finds itself only
four years after political change came about. At that
time, a new democratic force came to power that was
committed to defending human rights and promoting
policies of social inclusion. Among those policies are
gender equality and fighting sexual violence.

In fact, the Government of President Mauricio
Funes Cartagena is fighting against those conservative
sectors that in the past were responsible for establishing
virtually feudal systems ofpower between the politically
and economically wealthy, on the one hand, and the
majority of the impoverished population, deprived of
their rights and guarantees, on the other.

In recent years, with the invaluable help of the
international community and multilateral organizations,
El Salvador has witnessed visible changes. For the first
time in our history, a policy defending and guaranteeing
human rights and social rights was established and we
began to wage a battle to eradicate violence in all its
forms. In the area of public safety, El Salvador is now
experiencing an unprecedented era in which crime has
drastically dropped, especially the number of murders.
In just one year, statistical data shows, violent deaths
have dropped by 52 per cent - whereas we used to
have a rate of 70 deaths per 100,000, it is now 30 per
100,000. Cases of femicide have also dropped, with a
clear downward trend, and last year the rate of femicide
was down by 50 per cent.

Parallel to those efforts, the Salvadoran
Government has strongly promoted a campaign against
gender-based violence and sexual violence in general
on different fronts. We have strengthened legislation
with the approval of the comprehensive special act on
violence-free lives for women. The entry into force
of that new piece of legislation has been fundamental
in enabling the State to exercise its responsibilities in
defending, protecting and guaranteeing the rights of
women.

In 2011, the programme entitled Ciudad Mujer
was launched, an unprecedented experiment in Latin
America of gender-equality policies. It makes invisible
people visible in public policy. It provides comprehensive
care to women, particularly from poorer backgrounds.
It gives them support in gender violence - particularly
sexual violence - training, entrepreneurship education
and training to enter the work force, as well as in sexual
and reproductive health.

Ciudad Mujer started in March 2011 with the
opening of its first centre. There are now another three
centres. More than 140,000 women have participated
in the programme, with more than 260,000 services
having been provided to date. That policy has been
recognized by eminent persons throughout the world as
being an outstanding gender equality policy.

Finally, the President, through the secretariat
for social inclusion and the Salvadoran Institute for
Women's Development, is currently promoting a
large-scale awareness-raising campaign to combat
violence against women, which is having a huge social
impact. For the first time in El Salvador, we now have
a clear policy to combat sexual- and gender-based
violence, with particular concern for the principles
enshrined by the United Nations on this matter. We
now need the ongoing support of the international
community.

We particularly need the assistance of the United
Nations, given the paramount role it played as
mediator in our 1992 peace agreements, so that the
accomplishments of the past few years do not lose
momentum and so that there is no possibility ofa return
to the past in those areas.

The Government of El Salvador is thus strongly
committed to combating impunity and to providing
access to redress for victims, as can be seen on a daily
basis in the Ciudad Mujer programme. For that reason,
it is important that the international community follow
that process in El Salvador and that political support
and cooperation be provided, so that, in the short term,
the positive results of the current compensation policies
can be seen on a large scale.

