Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We, too, would
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women, and the three civil society
representatives for their briefings. I would like to
commend in particular Ms. Lusenge, Ms. Mohammed
and Ms. Murabit for their direct messages and for the
challenges they have laid out to the Council.

We thank and congratulate Spain and the United
Kingdom for their initiative in convening this debate
and for steering us through the adoption of resolution
2242 (2015) this morning. It is right that we take a fresh
look at the situation of women and girls in the context
of global peace and security for, as many have noted,
15 years have passed since resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted.

We can take some satisfaction that, over the past
15 years, we have made progress in ensuring that
the women and peace and security agenda is taken
into account in international conflict prevention
and resolution efforts. That in itself is no small
achievement. However, words in resolutions and other
documents, even in mandate formulations, only take
us so far. As we have heard today, we need to focus
on practical steps to improve the situation for women
on the ground, rather than just achieving rhetoric. The
issue is not new, but the landscape continues to change
and, sadly, is worsening. Rising violent extremism,
increased numbers of refugees and internally displaced
persons, and combatants who take no account of the
civilians in their midst all affect women and girls
disproportionately. The targeted use of sexual and
gender-based violence by terrorist groups such as
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram,
as part of a deliberate strategy, is a horrendous new
development.

This only makes more urgent the need to deal with
the threats posed by such groups and the underlying
causes that give rise to terrorism. In that broader sense,
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism is
gender- and age-neutral, but we must face up to the
reality that women and children suffer inordinately.
That is a reality that must be confronted by the Council,
by the General Assembly and by Member States. None
of us can say that it is someone else's business. It is
a problem we must all own. At one level, we need
to bring home to people - whatever their country,
religious belief or ethnicity - that the mistreatment of
women and children, whether as a deliberate strategy
or an incidental consequence of conflict, is utterly
unacceptable. It will never be tolerated or accepted.
Bullying, domination, coercion - whatever terms
are used - are despicable. Those that engage in such
behaviours should be exposed for the cowards that they
are and they must be held accountable.

At another level, we need to move beyond a security
driven approach to conflict resolution. The recognition
of women's rights and perspectives must be a part of
all programmes and policies for conflict resolution and
post-conflict development. Women must be able to play
a meaningful and integral part in conflict resolution
processes and outcomes. What does that mean in
practice? It means that women must be advisers,
negotiators, decision-makers and implementers, as
well as receivers of a peace process, if it is to have any
meaningful chance of success.

In our own small way, New Zealand has sought
to play its part. We have had women in front-line
peacekeeping roles since the year 2000. We are working
to ensure that women are included at more senior levels
in future peacekeeping operations. Our national action
plan focuses on improving international deployment
rates of senior staff within the New Zealand Defence
Force and New Zealand Police to increase the numbers
of women at decision-making levels in peacekeeping and
assistance missions. We also recognize the importance
of empowering local women and ensuring equality of
access to justice. During our seven-year engagement
in Afghanistan, New Zealand helped establish the first
Afghan National Police women's committee at the
Bamyan provincial police headquarters. Key purposes
of the committee are to advocate for and support female
police, and the development and implementation of a
non-discrimination and harassment policies for all
police employees so as to encourage the recruitment
and retention of women police officers.

Another vital aspect of the women and peace and
security agenda for the Organization, in particular, is to
deal effectively with allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse by our own people. It is a stain on the work of
the United Nations and of the Council that allegations
of such behaviour by United Nations peacekeepers
continue to be made with a frequency and particularity
that brook no easy dismissal. We have taken some
satisfaction from the Secretary-General's strong
statements that such behaviours will not be tolerated
and that perpetrators will be held criminally to account.
We agree that there must be a means for ensuring that
troop- and police-contributing countries exercise
criminal jurisdiction over their nationals participating
in United Nations operations when such allegations
are made. We also agree with the high-level advisory
group that States that do not live up to this should
not be allowed to participate in future peacekeeping
operations. Most of all, we insist that effective action
be taken. This, too, is a problem that we must all own if
it is to be dealt with effectively.

In conclusion, I want to affirm that New
Zealand - as the first country to recognize women's
suffrage, at the national level - remains committed to
achieving the reality that women must play a similarly
equal role in efforts towards any lasting peace.

