Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Allow me first to thank
you personally, Madam President, and the United
States delegation and Ambassador Susan Rice for the
continuing leadership on the issue of sexual violence in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his steady engagement.

Croatia would like to add its voice to those who
strive to put an end to that abhorrent practice. Since the
representative of Croatia delivered a speech during the
open debate on the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008) in August this year (S/PV.6]80, p.]6), allow me
here merely to add some brief remarks.

First and foremost, I would like to state that
Croatia was a strong supporter of resolution 1820
(2008) within the Council, from its conceptual phase to
its ultimate adoption. In that same vein, we now give
equal support to the new resolution 1888 (2009) that
we have just adopted today, and we would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate everyone who has
worked so hard to gain that result.

With resolution 1888 (2009), the Security
Council recognizes many important elements in the
fight against sexual violence in armed conflict. It
recognizes the need for civilian and military leaders to
demonstrate political will in combating impunity and
using their authority and powers to prevent sexual
violence. It demands protection for civilians from
sexual violence by all parties to an armed conflict and
urges them to investigate all reports of sexual violence.

The members of the Security Council have had
the opportunity to visit today's most affected areas and
to talk to victims, and are fully aware of gravity of the
problem. Moreover, the Security Council has reiterated
its intention, when adopting or renewing targeted
sanctions, to consider including designation criteria
pertaining to acts of rape and other forms of sexual
violence.

Notwithstanding those positive measures, we
believe that the resolution's request to the Secretary-
General to appoint a Special Representative to address
the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict, as well
as to rapidly deploy a team of experts to situations of
particular concern with respect to sexual violence,
deserves special praise.

In adopting resolution 1888 (2009), as well as
through the recently adopted resolution 1882 (2009),
the Security Council is sending a clear signal to those
who continue to perpetrate horrific crimes against
women and girls in armed conflict and to those who
tolerate or condone such sexual violence. They will be
held accountable.

