Ms. Rahimova (Azerbaijan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor to respond to the
statement made by the delegation of Armenia.

Armenia's statement was full of distortions and
misinterpretations, which we utterly reject. It is yet
another attempt by Armenia to mislead the international
community, divert attention from its responsibility
arising from the occupation, mass atrocities and
other policies it pursues in violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to the
fact that, on 1 September 2015, Armenian forces, from
their position in the occupied territories of the Republic
ofAzerbaijan, opened fire and, with full precision, they
targeted a wedding ceremony in Gapanly village in
Terter district. Three civilians, including one child, were
wounded. The direct deliberate targeting of civilians is
a blatant violation of international humanitarian law by
Armenia, which continues to commit war crimes under
international criminal law. Unfortunately, that is not a
new phenomenon.

During the ongoing aggression against Azerbaijan,
Armenia has committed numerous crimes, including
indiscriminate attacks against, and killing of,
civilians, hostage taking and detention, inhumane
treatment, execution, the capture of war prisoners,
taking of hostages and ethnic cleansing of the occupied
territories. The most heinous of them is the massacre
of the civilian population of the town of Hodjali, in
which 100 persons died, including children, women and
the elderly. Those crimes are not isolated or sporadic
acts, but were part of Armenia's deliberate, widespread
and systematic policy, its practice of committing
atrocities, rooted in ideas of racial superiority, ethnic
differentiation and an expansionist policy.

The documents adopted by the international
organizations implicitly refer to the crimes committed
by Armenia as a blatant breach of international
humanitarian law. In 1993, resolution 853 (1993)
in particular condemned attacks on civilians and
bombardments of inhabited areas, and expressed
grave concern at the displacement of large numbers of
civilians on the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

