Mr. Kickert (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statements made on behalf of the European Union,
the Group of Friends on Women, Peace and Security
and the Human Security Network.

We would like to thank Peru for convening this open
debate and the briefers for their reports. Understanding
the impact of armed conflict on women and girls is
central to effectively address sexual violence, prevent
its occurrence and protect those at risk. We will
highlight four points in the context of this debate.

My first point concerns protecting minorities.
Persons belonging to minorities encounter a high risk as
targets ofviolence. That was exemplified to us today by
the testimony of Ms. Razia Sultana from the Rohingya
community of Myanmar. Equally appalling is the fact
that Da'esh continues to traffic Iraqi Yazidi women
and girls into and across Syria as part of its campaign
targeting minorities. The patterns of violence against
women and girls belonging to minorities are embedded
in underlying structural conditions, including
inequality, gender-based discrimination and neglect
for the rights of persons belonging to minorities. As

the sponsor of the resolutions on the rights of persons
belonging to minorities at the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council, Austria stresses the
obligation of States to protect minorities from Violence
and underlines the necessity of empowering women and
girls belonging to minorities who are often particularly
vulnerable. As Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Patten stated today, empowerment is a main
building block for protection. We also emphasize
the relevance of early-warning and awareness-
raising measures to tackle problems regarding the
situations of minorities, including through the relevant
United Nations mechanisms and bodies, as well as
regional organizations.

My second point involves countering impunity.
We must do much more to combat and prevent sexual
violence directed against women. Women and girls are
kidnapped, held captive as sex slaves and traded like
goods or animals. The crimes committed against them
amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Those responsible simply have to be brought to justice.
Austria wants to see all perpetrators, including Da'esh
and Boko Haram fighters, held accountable for their
repulsive acts of violence against women and girls. As
Special Representative Patten said today, only by truly
fighting impunity will we achieve a deterrence effect.
In order to help establish accountability, Austria has
supported and contributed financially to the creation of
the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. We also anticipate that the
investigative team to support domestic efforts to hold
Da'esh accountable by collecting evidence in Iraq will
soon generate actionable results.

The third point concerns preventing sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers.
Reports of sexual exploitation and abuse by both military
and civilian personnel in United Nations peacekeeping
missions in recent years have increasingly tainted
the reputation of the United Nations and undermined
its credibility. Austria condemns such behaviour and
welcomes the focus of the Secretary-General on that
important issue and his initiatives in that regard.
Austria will sign the Secretary-General's compact on
the elimination of sexual exploitation. We also intend
to include this subject in the curriculum of the United
Nations-certified course on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The course is held on a regular basis
at the Austrian Study Centre for Peace and Conflict
Resolution in Stadtschlaining and is attended by senior
staff in United Nations peacekeeping from around
the world.

The fourth point involves reintegrating survivors.
Sexual violence in conflict has a significantly
detrimental impact on individuals and communities.
In all too many settings, victims and their children
are stigmatized, discriminated against and rejected by
their communities. An example of determined efforts
to support the reintegration of survivors of sexual
violence is the case of northern Uganda, where during
the conflict with the Lord's Resistance Army many
serious crimes, including various forms of sexual and
gender-based violence, were committed. Since 2008,
the Austrian Development Agency, together with
the International Center for Transitional Justice, has
implemented four consecutive projects with a focus
on supporting ongoing work on transitional justice
in Uganda, with the aim of reintegrating victims into
their communities.

Against the background of my own professional
experience, I also note the case of the conflict-related
sexual violence that took place in Kosovo in the late
1990s, which is not mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/250). It is important that every
woman and girl who has experienced sexual violence is
recognized, as such recognition may constitute the first
step in a very difficult healing process to overcome the
inconceivable traumas suffered.

Violence directed against women and girls has to be
eradicated in all its forms. Sexual violence in conflict
builds upon the structural violence and discrimination
against women and girls, which is already present in
peacetime. Against that backdrop, Austria recently
launched a campaign, with a fund of €l million, to
support activities that oppose female genital mutilation
and its effects.

Rest assured that we will continue our work to
achieve gender equality and the empowerment of
women across the board, with a special focus on women
and peace and security.

