Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank you, Sir, for having organized this
important open debate on sexual violence in armed
conflict. Its focus on the fight against impunity and on
the crucial need to ensurejustice for survivors is, in our
opinion, particularly appropriate.

I also take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for his statement, and Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura
for her remarkable work as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Finally, I welcome the contribution of Ms. Jane Adong
Anywar, of the NGO Women's Initiatives for Gender
Justice, and Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

My delegation fully aligns with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

It is important that the Council reiterate today its
most firm condemnation of sexual violence. That abject
and cowardly war tactic ruins the lives of hundreds of
thousands of women and girls, as well as of many men
and boys, who become not only the powerless witnesses
of the harm inflicted on their spouses, mothers,
daughters and sisters, but also, with greater frequency,
direct victims of sexual violence.

Sexual violence in armed conflict is indisputably
a subject directly linked to international peace and
security, as underscored in resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), and today's resolution
2106 (2013). The fight against sexual violence in
conflict is complex undertaking requiring various
levels of action, including combating impunity, which
is especially important.
Both restorative and punitive, justice can play a
prevention role in terms of future conflict by deterring
potential perpetrators from committing crimes. By
the same token, justice must enable victims to gain
recognition for wrongs they have experienced, and
thereby facilitate the process of remembrance and
reparation, eventually leading to reconciliation and
peacebuilding. As the representative of a victims
organization in Guinea once said, "before turning
the page, we must read the page". Unfortunately, at
present the vast majority of victims are deprived of this
basic right and the vast majority of the perpetrators of
these crimes do not answer for their actions. That is
inacceptable.

We all know that regardless of cultures and
backgrounds, cases of sexual violence are not always
reported, either because the survivors fear being
ostracized or because they fear for their lives or those
of their relatives, or for both reasons at once. We must
therefore make every effort to ensure protection for
Victims. It is also important to protect the human rights
advocates who struggle daily to make the survivors
heard. A crime that is not denounced and documented
is a crime that can never be prosecuted and will never
be the subject of reparations.

National courts are primarily responsible for
prosecuting and trying the perpetrators of sexual
violence associated with armed conflict. States must
likewise assume their responsibilities by taking the steps
necessary to incorporate into their national legislation
provisions criminalizing sexual Violence and excluding
amnesty laws for the most serious crimes, including
sexual Violence. The international community, for its
part, must continue to support national authorities in
their efforts to fight impunity. At the United Nations,
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict can play a particularly useful
supporting role in this regard.

But we must be clear - whatever the reason, many
countries in post-conflict situations do not have and
will not have in the medium term a legal system capable
of judging, with all the guarantees of fair justice, the
perpetrators of these crimes. In such circumstances,
under the principle of complementarity, international
criminal justice must fulfil its supplementary role.

My delegation applauds the efforts made in this
regard by the International Criminal Court (ICC). The
actions and proceedings before the ICC have clearly
helped to strengthen the fight against impunity. I recall
in this context that the issue of a second arrest warrant
against General Bosco Ntaganda includes counts of
crimes against humanity, rape and sexual slavery.
Bosco Ntaganda is now in The Hague being tried for
his crimes, thanks to the cooperation of Member States
that have contributed to his transfer to the ICC. This
is critical matter, and I reiterate the call on States to
cooperate with the Court in accordance with their
respective obligations.

Finally, in the fight against impunity and to end
sexual violence related to conflict, it is important for
the Council to continue to discharge its responsibilities,
provide concrete follow-up to its decisions, adopt, if
necessary, targeted measures to increase the pressure
on perpetrators, and systematically inscribe the alleged
perpetrators of sexual Violence on sanctions committee
lists, taking into account the information provided by
the Special Representative in this regard. Resolution
2106 (2013), which we havejust adopted, is important in
that repsect, and Luxembourg is proud to be a sponsor.
It sends a clear signal to all parties who commit sexual
violence that the Security Council will not relax its
attention to these acts. Impunity will not prevail.

