Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago is pleased to uphold its tradition of participating
in this annual open debate on the important topic of
promoting the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda and sustaining peace through
women's political and economic empowerment.

Trinidad and Tobago recognizes the competence
of the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations in matters related to
the maintenance of international peace and security
and wishes to express its satisfaction that the issue of
women and peace and security remains prominent on the
Council's agenda. My delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his important
remarks on the subject. We also welcome the very
informative briefings by the Executive Director of UN-
Women, as well as the representatives of civil society.

For Trinidad and Tobago, the achievement of
gender equality and the empowerment of women
remain pivotal to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. Against that backdrop,
we welcome the Secretary-General's disarmament
agenda, entitled "Securing Our Common Future",
which has a strong foundation in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We furthermore commend
the Secretary-General for his recognition and advocacy
with respect to the meaningful inclusion of the equal,
full and effective participation of women in all
decision-making processes related to disarmament.
My delegation remains appreciative that the Secretary-
General has prioritized gender parity as a moral duty
and an operational necessity.

Eighteen years ago, resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted by the Security Council. Trinidad and Tobago
remains steadfast in its View that the seminal character
of that resolution cannot be overemphasized, as it was
the first to recognize the need for the involvement ofboth
women and men in efforts to attain sustainable peace
and security. Similarly, we recognize the distinctive
nature of subsequent resolutions on sustaining peace,
as well as the importance of women's leadership
and meaningful participation in the prevention and
resolution of conflict and peacebuilding, as embodied
in the relevant resolutions on sustaining peace. Our
support for those resolutions is not based only on our
legal obligations under the Charter, but also on our own
national laws, which have entrenched the inalienable
rights of women into our domestic legal framework.

Trinidad and Tobago subscribes to the rule of law
as a fundamental safeguard in the advancement and
protection of the rights of women. We therefore view
as essential our continued adherence to obligations
under a number of international instruments that seek
to protect the rights of women and girls, including
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.

The vulnerability of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict, and, in my country's specific
circumstances, armed violence, continues to engage
our attention. Trinidad and Tobago remains a strong
proponent of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). We submit
that the ATT represents a significant achievement in the
global fight to eliminate the diversion of conventional
arms to the illicit market, which could reduce, if not
end, untold suffering, particularly for women and girls.
The Caribbean Community played an important role in
securing a particular provision of the Treaty that was
cause for much celebration - the inclusion oflanguage
that protects women and girls from armed gender-
based violence.

In the spirit of advancing the dual agenda of the
attainment of international peace and security and the
empowerment of women, in 2010 Trinidad and Tobago
introduced the first General Assembly resolution on
women, disarmament, non-proliferation and arms
control - resolution 65/69. It is our view that the
resolution complements resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions on the matter by focusing on
the participation of women in processes geared towards
the advancement of disarmament, international peace
and security. The present iteration of the resolution is
currently being addressed within the context of the First
Committee of the General Assembly and continues to
enjoy the support ofa large number of States.

As a current member of the Executive Board
of UN-Women, Trinidad and Tobago pledges to
continue to work with Member States for the universal
achievement of gender equality. We recognize UN-
Women's strategic plan for the period 2018-2021 as
an important instrument that could contribute to the
attainment of that objective. Additionally, for the first
time, a national of Trinidad and Tobago was elected
to the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women for the period 2019-
2021. We are grateful to the international community
for the confidence entrusted to Trinidad and Tobago in
that regard.

In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago takes this
opportunity to reaffirm its commitment to the
advancement and empowerment of women. We remain
committed to working with other Member States and
our partners at the regional, hemispheric and global
levels to promote the involvement of women as equal
partners in matters related to peace and security,
including at all levels of decision-making processes.

