Ms. Allami: I am here for my friends and colleagues
Samira Salih Al-Nuaimi and Umaima Al-Jebara, who
were recently killed defending women's rights in Iraq;
Razan Zaitouneh, who was abducted for documenting
human rights violations in Syria; and all activists who
risk their lives daily to make women and peace and
security not just a resolution, but a reality.Concrete
steps are needed to implement the entire women and
peace and security agenda in all settings. I speak on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security, and in my capacity as Founder and
Director of the Women for Progress Centre in Iraq.

Displacement is a cause and consequence of
conflict. In my daily work I see how displaced women
and girls are affected when they are forced to flee.
Many are traumatized by the violence. Imagine fleeing
because your daughter is at risk of being kidnapped,
forced to marry a militant fighter or trafficked into
sexual slavery. Today must be about women and girls
and responding to their rights and needs, promoting
their rights, leadership and voice.

We in civil society echo their voices in reporting to
the Security Council that we have seen no significant
change in the areas that would have the biggest impact.
That includes in the efforts of the United Nations and
Member States to end gender inequality, stop supplying
arms that exacerbate the damage caused in wars, insist
on women's inclusion in negotiations, consult with
women and support and invest in women's human
rights and civil society.

I want to address three key interconnected ways
to overcome this inaction: first, the importance of
women's leadership and participation; secondly, the
need for gender-sensitive and multisectoral responses
to protection efforts and humanitarian assistance;
and, thirdly, women's role in conflict prevention and
in combating State and non-State violence, including
violent extremism and terrorism.

First, women must fully participate and be
consulted systematically in decision-making across all
displacement settings, in humanitarian programming
and, of course, in the broader political, security and
peace processes. Supporting women's civil society
and human rights defenders is key, both politically
and financially. National Governments, international
actors and donors must invest in community-led long-
term solutions and provide assistance and training to a
diverse range of grassroots civil society organizations.

Secondly, it is vital that protection efforts and
humanitarian assistance be gender-sensitive and
multisectoral, in accordance with international law.
Women and girls, including those displaced, must have
access to livelihood opportunities, the full range of
health-care services, including sexual and reproductive
health, and education to give them greater control
over their lives. Much attention is being focused on
providing immediate humanitarian assistance to
internally displaced people in Iraq. However, there are
gaps in addressing the long-term impact on them.

Recently, two young Yazidi women were rescued
when they were bought from Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria fighters. They had been passed from one group
of fighters to another across the country and repeatedly
raped. They were returned to their community, where
they have no access to health or psychosocial services.
Local religious leaders assured them they would not
be further harmed, but no emphasis is being placed on
addressing their long-term trauma or stigma.

Using a survivor-centred approach, we must also
build the capacity of law enforcement agencies to
respond to sexual and gender-based violence, including
in displaced settings. Women must be recruited to
senior policing roles. All perpetrators, including in
South Sudan and Somalia, where sexual violence by all
sides ofthe conflict is at horrific levels, must be held to
account under national and international human rights
and humanitarian law.

Thirdly, conflict prevention lies at the core of
the women and peace and security agenda and all
solutions must address the root causes of conflict
and displacement. That includes addressing
disarmament and demilitarization, gender inequalities
and investing in women's human rights, equality,
economic empowerment and education and women-
led civil society. Militarization and arms proliferation
fuel conflict by directly and indirectly killing and
impacting civilians. We condemn the use of Violence
against women, girls and all civilians, including in
Gaza, Syria and Iraq. The number and conditions of
women internally displaced persons and refugees has
been exacerbated by both State and non-State actors. In
Iraq and the region, violent extremists are deliberately
displacing communities. Women must be supported
in their efforts to connect formal and informal justice
systems and to engage moderate tribal and religious
leaders on women's rights.
Iraq's national security strategy, currently being
developed, must fully incorporate the role of women
within it and reflect the commitments in its national
action plan pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000). Efforts to
combat extremism must address the pre-existing threats
to women and girls embedded in laws and social norms.
The Iraqi Government must uphold its duty to ensure
that the legal framework protects women and girls
and ensures their full participation. The Government
must abolish every form of discrimination, in line with
international obligations, including passing domestic
Violence legislation and abolishing and criminalizing
child marriage and marriages outside of the court. Iraq
must guarantee the independence of its institutions,
in particular its National Human Rights Commission,
and ensure that they can operate free from political
influence. Legal aid for marginalized and vulnerable
groups must be funded and institutionalized.

All the aforementioned requires international
pressure and domestic political will. We call on the
Security Council and all Member States to use a
gender lens to address the challenges faced by women
who have been forcibly displaced, as well as across
all peace and security efforts, and to recommit to
working towards the full implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. Next year marks the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). Let us make 2015 the year for progressive
action, for senior political leadership, for strengthened
women's participation and leadership opportunities
and, once and for all, for the consistent implementation
of all women and peace and security commitments. In
conclusion, all human beings have the right to be safe
and to live a life in dignity.

