Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): Let me point out that I
have two statements to deliver today. The first will be
made on behalf of a group of countries and the second
in my national capacity.
I am pleased to speak on behalf of 55 Member
States, representing all five regional groups of the
United Nations.

On the tenth anniversary of the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, we applaud the critical
work carried out by Ms. Patten and pledge our full
support to her office.

We remain outraged by the persistent and
widespread occurrence of sexual violence in armed
conflict, committed by State and non-State actors.
Sexual violence in conflict is not inevitable and is never
acceptable. We underline that a climate of impunity
discourages reporting, undermines assistance and abets
further violations. Therefore, we are gravely concerned
that, despite the systematic use of sexual violence by
groups such as Da'esh and Boko Haram, no individuals
from such groups have been convicted for sexual
violence crimes.

Responsibility for the fight against impunity lies
with us, the Member States. Addressing and preventing
sexual violence is a core commitment of the women and
peace and security agenda. We must ensure that robust
legal and institutional arrangements are in place to
address sexual violence in armed conflict and that steps
are taken to investigate and prosecute perpetrators.

As information is an essential prerequisite for
accountability, we support survivor-centred efforts
to more systematically document and report sexual
violence in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.
In that regard, we urge the Secretary-General to ensure
that gender and sexual violence expertise is included
in international procedures, such as investigative
mechanisms, commissions of inquiry, United
Nations fact-finding missions and Security Council
sanctions committees.

We repeat our call on the Security Council to
systematically and explicitly incorporate and apply
sexual violence as a designation criterion in United
Nations sanction regimes, where such crimes are
persistently perpetrated. We reaffirm that amnesty
should not be granted to perpetrators of sexual violence
and that sexual violence should be explicitly prohibited
by the terms of ceasefires and peace agreements.

In all our efforts to ensure accountability, we must
not lose sight of the needs and rights of survivors of
sexual violence in conflict. As a starting point, the
United Nations and its Member States should place a
greater emphasis on listening to the diverse voices of
survivors, as well as collaborating with the civil society
organizations working to address sexual violence
in armed conflict. That approach helps to empower
survivors, identify barriers to assistance and justice,
avoid further harm and improve our collective response
and accountability.

Sexual violence against men and boys is also an
expression of unequal gender norms. Responses must
take into account the diverse and intersecting experience,
identities and needs of all victims and survivors.

Greater efforts are also needed at all levels to
ensure that survivors of sexual violence and children
born of rape have access to non-discriminatory and
comprehensive health services, including sexual and
reproductive health, psychosocial, legal and livelihood
support and other multisectoral services, taking into
account the specific needs of persons with disabilities
and in line with resolution 2106 (2013).

As part of our efforts to secure both accountability
and victim support, we want to emphasize the
importance of providing reparations to survivors of
sexual violence in armed conflict.

Finally, sexual violence in conflict is part of a
continuum of violence, including in peacetime, that is
fuelled by gender inequality. We believe that systemic
gender-based discrimination, such as women's exclusion
from political life and economic marginalization, as
well as discriminatory legal systems and customs, is
conducive to sexual violence in conflict. Any serious
effort to prevent and address sexual violence in conflict
must move beyond the immediate symptoms and

confront structural inequality itself. Such an approach
should include the protection of women human rights
defenders, who are themselves the target of attack.

(spoke in French)

I would now like to make a few additional remarks
in my capacity as the representative of Canada.

Today's debate is of key importance to my
country. Canada's feminist foreign policy puts gender
considerations at the core of its global engagement,
and the reason is simple. It is because the evidence is
irrefutable. Supporting gender equality is the best way to
build a more peaceful, inclusive and prosperous world.
Sadly, today the Council's briefers confirmed what
we already knew. Sexual and gender-based violence
is widespread. Women, girls, LGBTI individuals and
other members of marginalized groups are targets. That
will change only through concerted efforts. My country
is not immune to that scourge. In Canada, the double
discrimination that indigenous women and girls endure
has increased our levels of sexual and gender-based
Violence. Within the framework of the United Nations
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, which is taking
place this week, I want to affirm my Government's
strong commitment to addressing the issue.

Just as we seek to prevent sexual and gender-based
violence at home, we also support efforts around the
world. In Myanmar, we are working with UNICEF
and the United Nations Population Fund to remove
systemic barriers to sexual and reproductive health and
rights. In the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, we are
supporting the work of the United Nations Development
Programme in providing survivors of Violence with
legal, medical and psychosocial support. For the next
two years, Canada will lead the Call to Action on
Protection from Gender-based Violence in Emergencies.
We are also working to strengthen accountability at
the global level. The laws are indeed changing, even
if too slowly. In the meantime, the inability of existing
national legal frameworks to deal with such crimes in
no way diminishes the seriousness of those crimes. In
such cases, we therefore believe firmly that we have a
collective legal and moral responsibility to act.

(spoke in English)

A lack of political will, including in the Council,

should also not enable impunity. The shortcomings of the
systems in place should be recognized and addressed and
alternative approaches pursued. For example, Canada
is supporting the deployment of experts through UN-
Women to secure accountability for sexual and gender-
based crimes in Myanmar, Syria, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Burundi, Yemen
and Mali. Such deployments make a difference. The
sexual and gender-based violence experts deployed
with Canadian support to the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar directly contributed
to a finding that sexual and gender-based violence in
Myanmar's Kachin, Shan and Rakhine states amounted
to war crimes and crimes against humanity. While
this work is critical, we know it is not easy. Canada's
support for the collection of evidence of crimes by
Da'esh in Iraq and Syria has encountered a number of
challenges. Survivors and witnesses express legitimate
and growing frustrations about the delays in obtaining
justice, as well as a sense of psychological fatigue from
repeatedly having to share their experiences with media
outlets and non-governmental organizations.

International support for investigative bodies
documenting sexual violence is key, but we must
acknowledge our own responsibilities if we are to
prevent the revictimization of survivors. We must all
continue to ensure that the voices of victims and their
families are fully reflected in our efforts. All victims of
sexual and gender-based violence expect action. They
expect justice and accountability, and better efforts on
prevention. They are right. I would expect the same, and
I suspect Council members would too. Resolution 2467
(2019), adopted today, has many important elements,
and we commend Germany for its tireless efforts.
However, we are disappointed that it is silent on at least
two counts. We urge the Council to explicitly recognize
that LGBTI individuals are targets of sexual violence in
conflict owing specifically to their sexual orientation
or gender identity. That persecution is nothing new.
Homosexuals, branded with pink triangles by the
Nazis and pushed off buildings by Da'esh, have always
been targeted. Situations of armed conflict magnify
underlying discrimination against LGBTI individuals,
which can be manifested through sexual violence.
While such persecution is unfortunately long-standing,
what is new is the growing expectation of concrete
action. As my colleague from Uruguayjust pointed out,
greater efforts are needed to monitor and report on such
violence and ensure that Member States strengthen
their national legislation to protect LGBTI victims.

Canada also very much regrets that consensus
could not be reached on a reference in the resolution
to sexual and reproductive health rights. The Security
Council should not be backtracking on conclusions that
it has itself reached in recent years. One step forward
cannot involve two steps back. To be clear, sexual and
reproductive health rights are essential to women's
autonomy and human rights. That is as true now as it
was when the Council considered the issue previously.
We cannot promote gender equality, address sexual
violence in conflict or implement a survivor-centred
approach without ensuring sexual and reproductive
health rights.

Should Canada be elected to serve on the Council
as a non-permanent member for the period from 2021
to 2022, we will be deeply committed to continuing to
advance this agenda.

