Ms. Mayanja: It is an honour for me to introduce
the report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (8/2009/465). May I begin by
expressing gratitude to you, Mr. President, for giving
me this opportunity to address the Council on the
progress made in implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
over the past year. I would also like to express my
appreciation for the leadership and commitment of Viet
Nam in preparing for this open debate.

The report before the Council (S/2009/465)
highlights ways in which armed conflict continues to
affect women and girls in situations with which the
Council has been seized. It identifies progress made in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and outlines
challenges and some recommendations for addressing
them.

Nine years since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), women and girls continue to be victims of gender-
based violence, especially sexual violence, in many of the
situations with which the Council was seized over the
past year. Armed conflict and its aftermath continue to
account for untold hardship for civilians, especially
women and girls. These violations - especially sexual
violence against women and girls - are pronounced
during open hostilities, but they exist even where open
hostilities have subsided. As noted in the statement
delivered by the Deputy Secretary-General, unfortunately
post-conflict atrocities often stay below the radar, seldom
reaching the attention of the international community and
leaving victims with little recourse to justice.

For his part, the Secretary-General has repeatedly
indicated in this Chamber his commitment to ending
violence against women and girls in conflict situations.
He did so on 7 August, 30 September, and in the
statement which has just been delivered by the Deputy
Secretary-General.

Member States, United Nations entities and civil
society have continued to make progress in ensuring
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Progress
is particularly evident in the areas of training and
capacity development. As a result, in some situations
women's participation in mediating and negotiating
peace, in searching for justice, in fostering reconciliation,
in supporting disarmament and demobilization, and in
rebuilding national institutions, is evident.

Much attention is being paid to protecting women
from the threat of mines, which remains a pressing
issue in post-conflict situations. In the reporting period,
there was a decrease in the number of casualties due to
mines, reflecting intensified activities in this area. Of
even greater significance is the recognition by women
themselves of the importance of their participation in
mine-action activities.

Among the most significant signs of progress is
the adoption by many Member States, including some
that have recently emerged from conflict, of national
action plans to guide the implementation of the
resolution. The process of developing many of these
plans has been collaborative, leading to the sharing of
experiences and expertise among Member States,
United Nations entities and civil society organizations.
This is a welcome development, which should be
emulated.

However, the adoption of national action plans is
only a first step. We must not lose sight of the fact that
these plans must be implemented if they are to achieve
their goals, and that they must be backed by resources.
Greater efforts by the United Nations system and by
Member States will be required beyond developing
capacity. Concrete actions must be taken to ensure that
services are provided and programmes implemented at
the country level.

It is critical that the Council continue to play a
strong advocacy role to root out sexual violence in
conflict and end to its use as a tactic and weapon of
war. I commend the Council for the adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009) as a reaffirmation of its
commitment to eliminating gender-based violence in
conflict situations. Equally important is the Council's
unequivocal commitment to women's engagement in
the entirety of peace and security processes. The
Council must be relentless in its insistence on women
as peacekeepers, peacebuilders and decision makers.

As we approach the tenth anniversary, the
Council must rededicate itself to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In this
regard, I am pleased to inform the Council that
preparations are already under way for the
commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). In June of this
year, the Government of Iceland co-organized with the
University of Iceland an international conference on
the tenth anniversary. Last month, the Deputy
Secretary-General, the African Union and the European
Commission jointly organized a ministerial breakfast
focusing on resolution 1325 (2000). Likewise, civil

society organizations are also engaged in the
preparations. What has consistently emerged is the
expectation that the Security Council will convene a
ministerial-level meeting next year to review progress to
date and to take concrete action to reinvigorate efforts
towards the full implementation of the resolution.

In spite of the demonstrated commitment at the
highest levels, the persistent obstacles to implementation
noted in the report before the Council will require even
greater resolve from all of us. Countries in and
emerging from conflict will require support to
strengthen their judiciary and security institutions to
enable them to hold perpetrators of crime accountable.

Despite progress, still few women are included in
peace negotiations in countries affected by conflict and
war. The reporting on the impact of armed conflict on
women and girls, and indeed of the gender dimensions
of armed conflict, is yet to become universal in
country-specific reports to the Council. This
information is essential to effective monitoring and
reporting to the Council. It should become a standard
feature of all country reports.

Finally, I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to the persistent blatant disregard of
international law, international humanitarian law and
resolution 1325 (2000) by parties to armed conflict.
This is a major and fundamental challenge to the
implementation of the resolution. Although the
resolution requires them to take action, to date no
mechanism has been designed to hold warring factions
accountable. Thus, they violate women and girls with
impunity. This aspect of the resolution requires the
Council's attention. Warring parties must be held
accountable. Without this, the protection of civilians as
a whole, and of women and girls in particular, will
remain elusive and the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) out of reach.

