Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, and
would like to encourage her to continue her visits to
countries that experience conflict-related sexual
violence and to brief the Council on those visits in
open meetings.

Liechtenstein co-sponsored resolution 1960
(2010) because it contains numerous valuable elements
that enable the Council to address the alarming
increase in sexual violence around the world. We agree
with the analysis of the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2010/604) that gender constructs are a critical but
insufficient tool to understand the full complexity of
sexual violence. We therefore welcome the approach
detailed in the report to widen the analytical lens and
to define sexual violence in accordance with the
definitions used in international law, in particular the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

Earlier resolutions and resolution 1960 (2010)
emphasize the primary responsibility of all States to
put an end to impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for crimes, including acts of sexual
violence. Nevertheless, national justice systems often
lack the willingness or the capacity necessary for
effective prosecutions. We thus welcome the progress
made with regard to the establishment of a Team of
Experts that can be deployed rapidly to assist national
justice systems. This is consistent with the principle of
complementarity, which stipulates that international
criminal justice mechanisms are activated only when
States are unable or unwilling to prosecute at the
national level.

As a particularly positive element, we welcome
the inclusion in future reports of the Secretary-General
of information on parties that are credibly suspected of
being responsible for acts of sexual violence. This
should provide a basis for the Council to formulate
more focused responses, including, where necessary,
the application of targeted measures and the
consideration of accountability mechanisms.

Liechtenstein also supports the establishment of
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence as another essential
element of resolution 1960 (2010). The Council
requires timely, accurate and reliable information in
order to respond effectively to conflict-related sexual
violence.

These are important achievements and we
congratulate you, Madame President, on having forged
a consensus on this text. At the same time, we also
wish to place on record that we consider the resolution
to be a missed opportunity. The Special Representative
stated in her remarks that she has made the fight
against impunity her priority since she took office. And
indeed, this was corroborated by the substance of her
briefing.

The Council, however, chose not to reflect that in
the text adopted today. In fact, the operative part of
resolution 1960 (2010) does not include any statement
on the Council's commitment to end impunity, let
alone on any concrete measures to that end. The
resolution is also silent on the importance of the work
carried out by the ad hoc tribunals established by the
Council itself and by the International Criminal Court,
to which the Council itself has referred a situation
where sexual violence is prevalent.
This seems particularly ironic at a time when the
mass rapes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have gained sad notoriety in any discussion on sexual
violence in armed conflict, and when much of the
recent work of the International Criminal Court has
been dedicated to that situation, most prominently
through the arrest of the militia leader Callixte
Mbarushimana earlier this year. I also wish to recall
that this was a situation referred to the Court by the
country affected itself.

We thank the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative for their clear reference to the
importance of the work of the International Criminal
Court with respect to combating sexual violence. We
hope that, in future deliberations, the Council will be
able to acknowledge the most concrete international
efforts to fight impunity for sexual violence, and thus
to be less disconnected from reality than the resolution
makes it appear in this respect.

