Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Human Security Network,
namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Slovenia, Thailand,
South Africa as an observer, and my own country,
Switzerland.

We would like to thank the Togolese presidency
for having convened this important open debate on
women, peace and security, an issue that is at the core
of the Human Security Network.

Let us further thank the Secretary-General for his
report and his Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, for her
outstanding work and commitment to this sensitive and
complex issue. The Human Security Network shares
the views expressed by the Secretary-General in his
recommendations to the Security Council, Member
States, donors and regional organizations.
12-23937

Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), we have witnessed significant advances
in this field, including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1960 (2010), the creation of the post of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
as well as the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, which contribute
significantly to strengthening the cooperation between
the United Nations system and Member States in order
to prevent crimes against women and girls. In addition,
they help to improve the efficiency of the national
judicial systems in ensuring the rule of law and
bringing perpetrators to justice, including to the
International Criminal Court.

However, it is deeply disturbing that today we
continue to witness rapes of women, girls and children
in general, in countries in armed conflict but also in
other situations, including post-conflict situations. We
recognize the efforts made by some Governments to
put an end to these crimes, to strengthen judicial
systems and to bring those responsible to justice.
However, as the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/33)
shows, progress remains slow, and in practice the
perpetrators of crimes against women and girls often
go unpunished.

The Human Security Network therefore urges
Member States to increase their efforts to prevent
conflict-related sexual violence by undertaking all
necessary efforts to implement all applicable legal
provisions in the matter. The primary responsibility is
theirs. But, at the same time, this constitutes a
challenge for the international community as a whole,
especially for regional and subregional organizations.
Their role in supporting the efforts of those countries is
crucial. The message must be clear; there shall be no
impunity for the perpetrators of such crimes, and the
countries affected and the international community will
not rest until there is accountability and justice is done.

The provision of genuine support, protection and
the relevant services to the victims and their families is
equally as important as rendering justice. In that
context, the support given at the community level is
vital. Projects that directly assist victims and their
families to help them overcome the trauma inflicted
upon them are of particularly great value.

One of the key issues in a post-conflict country is
security sector reform. Security is not a "men's issue";
it is a gender issue, and women must be involved in all

relevant discussions and negotiations from their
inception, and they must also be part of the higher
military ranks, which is where security-related issues
are usually discussed. The gender perspective must be
part of the reform and training of all security forces.

The Human Security Network emphasizes the
importance of the full and equal participation of
women in political processes, including in
peacemaking and peacebuilding. Their involvement
ensures the success of those processes. At the same
time, conflict-related sexual violence and the specific
needs of women and girls have to be addressed
adequately, both in ceasefire agreements and in peace
agreements.

Preventing crimes is as crucial as delivering
justice and supporting the victims. To that end, we
have to be able to improve the early warning systems
and monitoring mechanisms already in place and to
build upon them where needed. They must be capable
of detecting signs of possible crimes and must mobilize
the political and judicial authorities in order to prevent
them. They must involve all relevant levels, from the
community level to the provincial and national levels.
Regional organizations can also play an important role
in the creation of an efficient early warning system.

Finally, we appreciate the information provided
on the progress made in implementing the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements. The collection of
timely, accurate, reliable and objective information on
conflict-related sexual violence is crucial to tailoring
the Council's responses, as well as to enhancing action
to prevent sexual violence. We also wish to encourage
the deployment of women protection advisers to United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions in
order to strengthen the response of the relevant mission
components to conflict-related sexual violence.

We strongly hope that the Council will be able to
reach an agreement on the presidential statement later
today.

(spoke in French)

I will now make a statement in my national
capacity. A more detailed version of my statement can
be found in the distributed text.

Resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) on
women and peace and security constitute a robust
machinery, which demonstrates that the Security
Council and United Nations members are firmly

resolved to move from advocacy to the effective
implementation of their commitment to combat
conflict-related sexual violence. The establishment of
new mandates always raises the crucial issue of
coordination and the efficient use of existing
structures.

We welcome the fact that it is intended to
preserve the full flexibility of the monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements in order to adapt them to
the country-specific needs and circumstances. In that
regard, we would like to underscore the importance of
the continued and transparent communication of the
Office of the Special Representative with United
Nations country teams so as to foster ownership and
results-oriented implementation of the new structures
and processes in the field.

We note with great satisfaction that several
activities have been launched with UN-Women. We
hope that such productive cooperation will continue.
Switzerland recently contributed 3 million Swiss francs
to the United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence
against Women, which is administered by UN-Women.

The Secretary-General's report on conflict-related
sexual violence contains useful recommendations to
the Security Council, Member States and regional
organizations. I would like to recall three of those, in
particular.

First, prevention is a priority as it is an essential
part of our efforts to protect, in which many
stakeholders have a role to play. Specific and time-
bound commitments to put an end to all acts of sexual
violence and to bring their perpetrators to justice can
help to break the cycle of violence.

We strongly support more systematic measures to
enhance protection against sexual violence and
prevention of its recurrence through transitional justice
mechanisms. Such measures should link the fight
against impunity and recognition of victims' rights, for
example through appropriate reparations, but also
include strengthening the national capacity to combat
the causes of violence and, at the same time, to prevent
new cases.

Secondly, in resolution 1820 (2008), the Security
Council resolved to take acts of sexual violence into
consideration when establishing or renewing State-
specific sanctions regimes. That opportunity should not
be forgotten. It thus provides the means to take
targeted measures against, for example, the parties and
individuals mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
on sexual violence in conflict.

Finally, in his report, the Secretary-General calls
on the parties to include training on conflict-related
sexual violence in training programmes for
peacekeeping troops. In that regard, I would like to
draw the Council's attention to the handbook prepared
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
entitled "Standardized Best Practices Toolkit on
Gender and Policing in Peacekeeping Operations". The
handbook was co-financed by Switzerland.

The structures set up by resolutions 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010) are still in a testing
phase, and only proof of the reality will make it
possible to assess their effectiveness. The path is steep
and rocky. However, we should move forward
prudently and resolutely in strengthening the protection
architecture. The establishment of the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict is a significant part of that
course.

