Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I thank the Jordanian
presidency for convening this important debate on an
issue to which Croatia attaches great importance.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, and I shall make
some brief, additional remarks in my national capacity.

In our view, taking action to prevent and redress
conflict-related sexual violence is not only of
fundamental importance to international peace and
security, but also a moral duty and responsibility
of Governments and citizens of the civilized world.
However, the universal eradication of sexual violence
in war and conflict is still far from being a reality.
That is why we particularly welcome this debate as a
contribution to keeping this issue high on the global
agenda in our joint efforts to translate commitments
into concrete and measurable actions.

Sexual violence has regrettably been used in all
recent wars and conflicts, including in the former
Yugoslavia, to achieve political and military aims, to
terrify and humiliate opponents, to uproot communities
and ethnic groups and thus to contribute to the collapse
of entire societies for generations to come. Despite
specific provisions prohibiting sexual violence in treaty
and customary international law, as well as the political
momentum and visibility gained in recent years, sexual
violence in armed conflicts and other violent situations
continues to spread around the world, with grave
and devastating consequences for victims and their
communities, as documented in this year's report of
the Secretary General (S/2015/203). The present report
also brings to light a new dimension of the issue, such
as the use of sexual Violence as a tactic of terror by

extremist groups in Iraq, Syria, and Nigeria, as well as

in a number of other environments.

The alarming trends we are witnessing underscore
the need to promote gender equality and women's
empowerment in order to address the root causes of
conflict-related sexual Violence, transform harmful
social norms and counter the rise of extremism. It is
well known that conflict-related sexual violence is not
incidental, but inherently linked with ideology and
strategic objectives, and widely used as a tactic of war,
terror and intimidation.

Although women are widely recognized as effective
agents of peace and security, and their empowerment
can significantly contribute to economic growth, the
number of women participating in decision-making
processes in this sphere worldwide remains
unacceptably low. Women are not present enough in
post-conflict building processes either. In this regard,
we give our full support to the deployment of women
protection advisers alongside gender advisers in United
Nations missions.

During the Croatian homeland war in the 19905,
women in Croatia suffered grave Violations of their
human rights, including maltreatment and rape, which
was used as a tactic of war and an instrument of ethnic
cleansing. We have seen the impact of such violations on
their lives and their physical and mental health. Our own
experiences teach us of the importance of adequately
addressing conflict-related abuses of women's rights,
including sexual violence, and of providing necessary
assistance, health-care, psychological counselling and
financial support to women. By introducing the Law
on the Rights of Victims of Sexual Violence in the
Homeland War, which is expected to take effect over
the coming months, special status will be assigned to
survivors, who will be entitled to additional psychosocial
assistance, and to financial reparations for the abuse
they have suffered. This Croatian law, developed in
close cooperation and consultation with civil society
organizations and Victims, aims to ensure access to
reparations regardless of the results of the criminal
prosecution of perpetrators. Still, the punishment of
perpetrators remains a priority for Croatia, and we
firmly believe that impunity for conflict-related sexual
crimes must be addressed without any hesitation.

The extensive war and post-conflict management
experience that Croatia unfortunately gained on its
own territory, including our experience in drafting our
reparations law, can make an important contribution
to broader global efforts in preventing and combating
sexual violence in war and conflict. As a member of
the group of global champions in the Preventing Sexual
Violence Initiative, Croatia will spare no efforts to take
on a more prominent role in preventing and combating
sexual Violence in war and conflicts, and to continue to
give its firm support to all areas of the women, peace
and security agenda. We see it as a gender-based peace
agenda, which involves addressing the disproportionate
effect of conflict on women and combating violence
against women in conflict situations. It is also about
women's empowerment, securing the full, equal and
effective participation of women at all stages of the
peace process, and giving them an equal role in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as in
peacebuilding.

Our continued engagement rests on our firm
belief that the full realization of women's rights is
an indispensable basis for safeguarding basic human
rights and achieving human security and lasting peace.

