Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on convening
this highly relevant and timely debate, as well as the
Franco-German joint presidencies for bringing to the
fore the women and peace and security agenda.

Greece welcomes the adoption of resolution 2467
(2019) today and aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union. Please allow me
to make the following remarks in my national capacity.

During the past decade, the international community
has witnessed the systematic use of sexual violence
by State and non-State actors as tactics of war and
terrorism - that is to say, as part ofa broader strategy
of warfare that poses serious threats to international
peace and security. Conflict-related crimes against
sexual freedom and determination - most often
perpetrated against, but not limited to, women and
girls - are deeply rooted in and exacerbated by gender
stereotypes and discriminatory perceptions of gender
roles that cumulatively result in gender inequalities
that are usually of a structural nature within societies.
In that vein, efforts to prevent and respond to conflict-
related sexual violence should be collective, focusing
on the accountability of the perpetrators, as well as on
the empowerment of the surviving victims. Therefore,
political will to try or extradite alleged perpetrators, as
well as to enhance effective and timely international
judicial cooperation in criminal matters, is of
paramount importance.

Additionally, comprehensive education, capacity-
building and awareness-raising on the particular
aspects of conflict-related sexual violence and its
frequent use as a tactic of war and terrorism are
deemed to be extremely beneficial in order to end
impunity. Needless to say, such efforts should place
particular focus on the engagement of men and boys as
agents of gender-sensitive, peaceful change. A holistic
perspective of justice and accountability mechanisms
calls for a survivor-centred strategic approach to fight
against conflict-related sexual violence. In doing so the
international community and States should encourage
voices coming from civil society and women's
organizations, including grass-roots organizations.

A survivor-centred approach should incorporate
a robust gender perspective, coherently mainstreamed
across the whole spectrum of activities at the national,
regional and international levels. To that end, Greece
recently adopted a law on the promotion of substantial
gender equality, and the prevention and combating of
gender-based violence. The law calls for a whole-of-
Government approach to gender mainstreaming in
order to integrate a gender culture in public governance
and administration, including the justice sector. In that
regard, Greece is currently in the process of drafting
its national action plan on women, peace and security,
which coherently brings together all aspects of its
relevant national policies.

In conclusion, Greece reiterates its readiness to
cooperate constructively with the United Nations
institutions and Member States in fighting conflict-
related sexual and gender-based Violence and in
working towards the enhancement of substantial gender
equality - that is to say, the equality of all human
beings - so that no one is left behind.

