Ms. Awori: I am grateful for the honour and
privilege of addressing the Council today and of
sharing the perspectives of civil society. A full
statement has been distributed, and out of respect for
the time constraints of this meeting I shall limit myself
to reading out a few paragraphs of that statement. I ask
members to kindly take the time to read the full
statement later.

I would like to begin with one clear message
from civil society: We can no longer afford to wait. It
is time for action, not words. The experiences of
women during war are horrendous and their exclusion
from peace processes is frustrating. This exclusion is
costly not only to women but to the sustainability of
peace. Survivors of conflict and millions of women and
men around the world are looking to the Security
Council today to be bold. Communities rebuilding after
conflict cannot afford to omit more than 50 per cent of
their population from these efforts. To do so would
mean institutionalizing inequality, which is a recipe for
further conflict and instability.

The Security Council now has at its disposal all
the tools it needs to build a pragmatic programme of
accelerated implementation of its landmark resolution
1325 (2000). We have no need now to wait another
10 years for action. Indicators are in place, as
requested by the Council, and these will provide a
system for organizing evidence and an impetus for
cooperation within the United Nations and between the
United Nations and Member States. We look forward to
the Council endorsing these global indicators.

We urge the Security Council to endorse the
seven-point action plan included in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/466). There should be
systematic procedures to ensure that mediators consult
with women and that negotiators dialogue with
women's groups. We look forward to seeing a greater
number of women mediators.

We all have our roles to play in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Civil
society has been at the forefront of these efforts,
bringing to public awareness the scope and breadth of
the problem. We have done much, but there is much to
be done. Civil society will continue to work to
empower women in war-affected regions, and to work
on the ground with policymakers to bring about global
peace and human security. We urge Member States to
commit to powerful and concrete steps to fully
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to support
UN Women as a system lead on women, peace and
security. We urge Council members to be bold in
meeting this challenge. We look forward to the Council
taking up its commitments by endorsing the global
indicators on women, peace and security; by setting up
consistent leadership and action on women, peace and
security; and by ensuring that there is accountability
for those whose lives have been affected by the
conflict. Member States should ensure that UN Women
is fully equipped with the resources to become the
United Nations system's guide on women and peace
and security. A large portion of such resources should
be used to support programmes that allow women to
participate directly in all aspects of conflict
reconciliation, prevention and reconstruction.

Let us look at the past 10 years as years of
preparation, of building awareness of the breadth and
depth of the problem, of putting in place the structures
and the tools. But we must also note that these 10 years
of preparation have been costly to women's health and
well-being. Hence the urgency of action. This second
decade must be the decade of action on resolution 1325
(2000). We cannot wait another 10 years for action.

