Mr. Urbina (spoke in Spanish): Madam
President, Costa Rica recognizes your personal
leadership and the efforts that your country has made
in seeking to combat sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. We believe that the adoption of this
new resolution is another firm step in the path that we
began last year with resolution 1820 (2008) to stop the
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war.
Costa Rica's position on this subject was made
clear in the thematic open debate held on 7 August this
year. For that reason, I will limit myself to highlighting

only two points. The first point concerns the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and, the
second, the team of experts we are establishing in this
resolution 1888 (2009).

The appointment of a special representative of the
Secretary-General to combat sexual violence will,
without a doubt, play a strategic role in providing
visibility to this fundamental issue and, above all, in
helping to organize concerted action to combat sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict.

We believe that it is necessary to harmonize this
provisional mechanism with the setting up of the new
composite gender entity established by the General
Assembly in resolution 63/311, in order to avoid
duplication and overlapping of functions. We believe
that the Special Representative should be at the head of
the United Nations campaign against sexual violence in
conflict situations, UN Action, in order to make better
use of the existing resources and capacities of the
Organization. We hope that the enthusiasm generated
by the establishment of this new instrument can be
translated into tangible contributions to equip it with
the necessary capacity to live up to the high
expectations we all have for it.

In relation to the team of experts, we deem it
extremely timely to create such an entity on the basis
of such successful initiatives as the United Nations
Standing Police Capacity. We deem such strategic
interventions and technical assistance to be of utmost
use in helping States to establish their own mechanisms
to address the problem of sexual violence. We believe
that it would be useful to assess the possibility of
complementing and expanding these early and rapid
response capacities with technical assistance for the
strengthening of the rule of law and security sector
reform.

In conclusion, I should like, on behalf of the
Human Security Network, which is comprised of
Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland and
Thailand, with South Africa as an observer, to express
our gratification at the conclusion of the process that
led to the adoption of this new resolution. As we said
in our statement on 7 August, we commend the
progress that the Security Council has made in its
thematic discussions on this topic, and reiterate our
conviction that it is necessary to continue working
towards a comprehensive and strategic approach

focused on the critical areas of prevention, protection,
the participation of women, accountability, assistance
to victims and data collection, which we discussed in
detail at our most recent debate on this topic.

