Ms. Davis: I speak today on behalf of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, and in
my capacity as the Human Rights Advocacy Director
for MADRE, as well as a Working Group member.

Sexual violence and gender-based crimes are a
constant threat for many local women's organizations
and activists working on the front lines of conflict,
while survivors of such violence face immense obstacles
impeding their access to life-saving services. Impunity
for those crimes remains the norm. All the while,
women are excluded from peace and reconciliation
processes and from the design of policies to counter
terrorism and prevent violent extremism.

While sexual and gender-based violence is prevalent
across conflicts today, it is not a new phenomenon. It
is part of broader structural violence that is rooted in
attacks on gender equality and women's rights and
freedoms. Such oppressive gender narratives perpetuate
many different forms of violence. From Colombia
to Syria and Myanmar, many NGO Working Group
members have seen how conflict paves the way for a
wide range of abuses against women and girls. Today,
as the Security Council focuses on violent extremism,
we will highlight a number of areas that need urgent
attention.

First, there is the humanitarian response. Member
States must fulfil their obligations to those fleeing
conflict-related violence. There is much talk today of
strengthening international collaboration on protection
strategies and accountability mechanisms. At the same
time, however, Member States have been closing their
borders to those fleeing violence. Such contradictory
actions cannot stand.

Women and girls face daily threats from both
combatants and non-combatants, including rape,
trafficking and other rights violations as they flee
conflict-related violence. They are at risk in displaced
persons camps and when leaving camps to conduct
essential livelihood activities. In many of those
settings, gender-based violence is also perpetrated
by intimate partners, family members and civilians,
including humanitarian-aid staff. Refugee women
and girls are often unable to access basic services,
including the full range of sexual and reproductive
health care, psychosocial support and access to justice.
The protection risks that women and girls face in
humanitarian crises are compounded by the shame and
stigma that accompany sexual violence. We urge donor
States to fund comprehensive and non-discriminatory
sexual and reproductive health care, including access to
safe abortion services in humanitarian settings and in
line with international humanitarian law.

Local women's organizations must be supported
by the international community. Local women's
organizations not only provide shelter for the most
vulnerable, but they also act as first responders,
offering much needed aid and peer-to-peer support
to survivors of trafficking and other forms of sexual
and gender-based violence. Member States should take
action on the recent commitments made at the recent
World Humanitarian Summit and take practical steps to
support new financing mechanisms for women and girls
as leaders and decision-makers, to reduce vulnerability,
including vulnerability to trafficking, to ensure access
to sexual and reproductive health care in crisis settings,
and to end impunity.

Secondly, there are threats against female human
rights defenders. All Governments, including those
on the Security Council, must condemn the increased
crackdowns on women human rights defenders
and women's organizations. All national security
strategies, including those relating to preventing and
combating violent extremism, should be grounded in
a human rights framework and adhere to international
humanitarian law.

As members of the Working Group have reported
in numerous countries, speaking out about conflict-
related sexual violence is extremely dangerous,
especially in cases where State actors are implicated as
perpetrators. Local activists who speak up about rape
by security forces often face imprisonment, threats of
rape and deliberate efforts to tar their reputations. Often
impunity still reigns for those crimes. Under the guise
of countering violent extremism, Governments around
the world are invoking national security concerns to
justify the systematic harassment, arrest and detention
of women activists and providers. That securitized and
militarized framework also contributes to the shrinking
of civil society space.

The efforts of the international community to
address the threats of violent extremism cannot succeed
while women's human rights defenders are under threat.
As our colleagues engaging in the dangerous work of
defending women's rights know, the bitter irony is that
policymakers often speak to the importance of that work
while doing little to support it in practice. From Syria
to Afghanistan, Burundi and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, our brave colleagues continue to work
in conflict zones, facing death threats and sometimes
paying the ultimate price for their work.

Thirdly, with regard to justice and accountability,
documentation of combatant violence committed
against all marginalized persons must be supported.
For example, in Iraq and Syria local and international
groups are documenting human rights abuses committed
against women, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex (LGBTI) persons, and other minorities that
defy gender stereotypes. Those issues were raised last
year when the Security Council held the first-ever Arria
Formula meeting to address LGBTI rights. When such
violations in conflict are not exposed, history teaches
that they are often left out of the human rights discourse
and transitional justice processes. The Council should
support those documentation efforts and ensure that
crimes committed against all marginalized persons
in conflict are accounted for in tribunals and other
transitional justice processes.

The international community has a range of options
to support access to justice at the local, national, and
international levels. The recent landmark conviction of
former Chadian President Hissene Habre is a reminder
that while the wheels of justice turn slowly, they
do turn, and it is possible to achieve accountability
for crimes that include rape and sexual slavery. The
Security Council and other Member States should
expand political and financial support to accountability
efforts, including through referrals to the International
Criminal Court and ensuring that those with arrest
warrants against them face trial in The Hague.

Fourthly, turning to the Security Council and
peacekeeping, the Council must dramatically improve
its daily implementation of women, peace and security
obligations. It must better link protection efforts with
women's participation and rights, and call on mission
staff to hold regular consultations with women's local
civil society organizations and with women and girls
in displacement settings. Addressing and preventing
sexual violence in conflict also requires taking steps to
improve peacekeeping and prevent sexual exploitation
and abuse, including through better vetting and
accountability measures for peacekeepers. Moreover,
the Security Council should ensure adequate protection
mechanisms for the courageous whistleblowers who
bring those crimes forward.
The Council must ensure that it prioritizes and
promotes women's rights and participation through its
work. The Council has made numerous commitments to
those necessary steps, including in recent resolutions.
It is time to implement those existing commitments.
While formal peace negotiations must be transparent
and inclusive of local women peacemakers, their work
must also be supported in the long term. Peace talks
must not merely tick the gender-representation box, but
instead meaningfully and holistically include women
and civil society.

Finally, with regard to the necessary steps on
prevention, we cannot emphasize enough the urgent
need to curb the flow of guns and other weapons,
which exacerbate levels of sexual and gender-based
violence. The Security Council must confront that
issue, including by encouraging States to ratify the
Arms Trade Treaty and establish enforceable national
and regional regulations on small arms, consistent with
general recommendation No. 30 of the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
Prevention efforts must also address the role of
governmental and non-governmental actors alike in
facilitating trafficking, including the role of military
bases as trafficking hubs.

In conclusion, The horrific sexual violence
perpetrated by State actors, militias and extremists does
not take place in a vacuum. It is part of a continuum
of violence across societies, in which women's rights
are degraded and gender inequality is the norm. Armed
conflict magnifies those problems. Comprehensively
addressing the rights and humanitarian needs of
women and girls fleeing conflict requires addressing
those pre-existing inequalities. This contextual
analysis sheds light on sustainable solutions to long-
standing human rights violations that are exacerbated
by conflict. As we face multiple crises and conflicts
today, this approach to social change will help us, as
an international community, weave solutions out of
uncertainty and build a more equitable foundation for
the future.

