Ms. Bangura: I wish to thank the Government of
Rwanda for convening this debate on sexual violence in
conflict. I am also grateful for your presence, Madam
Minister, to preside over the debate, as well as for this
opportunity to address the Security Council.

I should like to start my statement by thanking
the Secretary-General for his personal leadership
in advancing this agenda, which has made a huge
difference for me in carrying forward that agenda.

Three weeks, ago I Visited Somalia. In Mogadishu,
I met Luul Ali Osman, who, three months ago, faced
the terrible weight of censure, arrest and imprisonment
for having dared to speak out about her rape by security
forces in a camp for internally displaced persons. Her
case reminds us of the tremendous risks associated
with reporting sexual Violence, not only for the
survivors themselves but for their families, the staff
of non-governmental organizations who provide vital
services and the journalists who try to shed light on
such crimes.

For too long, war has been waged on the bodies
of women like Luul. For too long, women have borne
the crippling consequences - physical, psychological,
social and economic - ofwartime rape. They have been
ostracized by their communities, cast out by husbands
and families, left destitute with their children.

With sexual Violence women lose everything, and
in the process communities themselves are lost, because
women are the life force of their communities. They are
mothers and caregivers to the next generation; they are
the healers, the economic backbone, the peacemakers
and the peacekeepers.

That is why today we lift our voices in unison and
once again join hands around this high table to renew
our pact to break the silence and turn the tide on war's
oldest and least condemned crime. In so doing, we
stand in solidarity with the many thousands of victims
and survivors around the world - not only women, but
also children and men - to say to them that they are
not forgotten, that their plight is of the highest priority,
at the highest level of the international system.

Over the course of five years we have witnessed
progress towards eradicating this crime. The Council
has led from the front, ushering in a paradigm shift
that has fundamentally altered our approach to
dealing with sexual violence in conflict. Crucially,
the Security Council's engagement has challenged
long-standing myths that sexual violence is cultural,
private, inevitable, or simply the random acts of a few
renegades.

Resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960
(2010) affirm that sexual violence, when committed
systematically and used as a tool of war, is a
fundamental threat to the maintenance of international
peace and security, and as such requires an operational
security and justice response. It is an affirmation that
there can be no credible security approach that does not
take into account the security of women as part of its
central calculus. Practically, it requires us to expand
the circle of stakeholders beyond gender experts to also
engage uniformed peacekeepers, mediators, ceasefire
monitors, war-crimes prosecutors and the full range of
civilian-protection actors.

Notwithstanding the progress that has been made
as a result of the engagement of the Council, the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/l49) before
members today paints a grim picture. In total, it
covers 22 situations: conflict, post-conflict and other
situations of concern. It also lists 32 parties in the
annex to the report. Ofthose, six are State actors, while
26 are non-State actors.

The report highlights some critical themes such
as the nexus between sexual violence and the illicit
extraction of natural resources; sexual violence as
a driver of the displacement of civilian populations;
forced marriage, rape and sexual violence by armed
groups; sexual violence as a tactic in the context of
detention or interrogation; and the plight of children
born out of wartime rape, about whom there is little or
no information available and therefore no meaningful
programmatic interventions.

The report emphasizes the urgency of ensuring
that sexual violence considerations are explicitly and
consistently reflected in peace processes, ceasefires
and peace agreements, and in all security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes in which the United Nations is involved.
The report also stresses the acute lack of services for
victims. It is absolutely essential that we continue to
meet our obligations to the survivors - the critical
health, psychosocial, legal and other interventions that
they must have to rebuild their lives. At the same time,
we also have to throw a more concerted spotlight on the
perpetrators, that is, those who commit, command or
condone sexual violence in conflict.

The continued engagement of the Security Council
must serve as an unequivocal statement of intent:
sexual violence in conflict will not be tolerated, and
the full force of international order will be brought
to bear to ensure accountability for such crimes. The
perpetrators must understand that there can be no
hiding place, no amnesty, no safe harbour. They must
know that they will be pursued by any and all means at
our collective disposal. In the process, we will begin to
transfer the stigma of this crime from the survivors to
the perpetrators.

The main promise of resolution 1960 (2010) is
prevention. It sets us on the path of accountability
and deterrence. In that respect, it marks a political
commitment to bring all of the Security Council's tools
to bear in preventing the atrocity of wartime rape. The
purpose of the 1960 (2010) accountability regime is to
influence the conduct of perpetrators and would-be
perpetrators.

Going forward, we must reinforce that regime. An
effective compliance system can, for the first time, raise
the cost and consequences for those who would commit
such crimes, where until now the price has been borne
by their victims. Today it is still largely "cost-free" to
rape a woman, child or man in conflict. Sexual violence
has been used through the ages precisely because it
is such a cheap and devastating weapon. We can and
must reverse that reality, making it a massive liability
to commit, command or condone sexual violence in
conflict.

Since taking office in September 2012, I have placed
particular emphasis on engaging national stakeholders
in order to foster national ownership, leadership and
responsibility. While actions by the Council or the
work of international justice mechanisms such as the
International Criminal Court are essential to send a
zero-tolerance message to perpetrators, ultimately they
complement the measures that must be taken at the
national level. It is at the country level that the political
will is most required to strengthen national laws,
institutions and capacities to prosecute sexual Violence
crimes, and to care for survivors.

This cannot be only a United Nations issue. It
belongs first and foremost to Member States, who bear
the primary legal and moral responsibility to ensure
the protection and well-being of their citizens. The role
of my Office, of the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, and of the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict
network, which is composed of 13 United Nations
entities working together to address this problem, is
to support national authorities so as to strengthen their
responses.

However, I cannot overemphasize that the
commitment of the United Nations system, however
great it may be, can never substitute for the political
will and action of national authorities.

Three weeks ago I undertook my first trip to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I visited a
community where last year 11 babies between the
ages of 6 and 12 months old were raped by elements
of Mai-Mai Simba/Lumumba, led by Morgan. It is
unimaginable that anyone could have committed such
atrocities.

Yet, under the cold light of strategy and tactics,
the rationale and purpose is clear. What more effective
way can there be to destroy a community than to target
and devastate its children? Faced with such horror, we
are compelled to turn the despair in our hearts into
unshakeable resolve that this will not happen to our
children - a resolve that matches the ruthlessness of
those who would commit such crimes with our own
relentless and unwavering pursuit of accountability,
and, ultimately, deterrence and prevention.

I am pleased today to announce ajoint communique
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations to strengthen
cooperation in a number of critical areas, signed by the
Prime Minister at the end of my visit. It reflects the
firm commitment that was made to me by President
Kabila Kabange to more effectively prosecute crimes
of sexual violence.

The Parliament of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is also committed to establishing a parliamentary
working group on sexual violence, and the Senate and
the National Assembly will hold a special session on
the issue. The communique presents an opportunity
for renewed action on sexual violence prevention
and the response in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Together we must hold the President to his
commitments. At the same time, we must support him
and his Government - technically and financially - so
that they can deal decisively with the problem.
In Somalia, our collective efforts over the past
months have freed Luul Ali Osman and those who
have dared to speak out in support of her cause. Last
week, President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, speaking to
military cadets in Mogadishu, declared that security
forces who raped citizens of Somalia would be fought
and defeated like any enemy of the State. I commend
the President and his Government for their resolve
to address the problem. We anticipate that a joint
communique outlining a framework of cooperation to
address sexual violence will be adopted in early May,
when the international community convenes for the
Somalia conference to be held in London.

The fact that preventing sexual violence will be
one of the central issues discussed at that conference
is an important commitment in itself. It signals that the
issue does not remain on the margins of the discourse
on peace consolidation in Somalia. Addressing sexual
violence is an essential prerequisite for durable peace
and development. I urge international donors to match
their strong political commitment with the necessary
financial resources, particularly for the provision
of services to survivors on the ground. If we are to
break that evil in Somalia and elsewhere, the level of
financial commitment must meet the level of political
commitment.

As the Council is aware, I also visited the Central
African Republic in December 2012. Like all of us
around this table, I am distressed by the subsequent
outbreaks of conflict that have shredded the Libreville
Peace Agreement, costing lives and resulting in sexual
Violence, child recruitment and other grave human
rights violations. A number of commitments were made
by the parties during my visit, which were expressed
in two communiques. We must send a clear message to
the Seleka coalition and all the parties to the conflict
that they are expected to uphold the commitments
made. They must immediately identify and release
all forcibly recruited children and women from their
ranks. They also have to issue and implement clear
orders prohibiting sexual violence and investigate
all allegations, so as to hold perpetrators to account.
The international community and the Council should
insist that no party can be a credible partner in the
peace process unless those basic conditions are met.
I wish to highlight the fact that the ceasefire signed
by the Seleka coalition in January did include explicit
reference to sexual violence as part of the definition
of that ceasefire. As a principle, that reference was
exemplary and must be carried forward in the Central
African Republic process and elsewhere.
Let us therefore make the commitment around
this table today that, in situations where sexual
Violence is a concern, there will never again be a
peace agreement, ceasefire agreement or ceasefire
verification mechanism that does not explicitly address
sexual violence. That includes the agreements that must
eventually be concluded in Mali and Syria to bring an
end to those conflicts.

I also wish to draw the attention of the Council
to the Visit to Colombia by my predecessor, Margot
Wallstrom, shortly before she left office. During
her visit, the Vice-President, speaking on behalf of
the Government, expressed openness to the idea of
developing what he referred to as a "framework of
cooperation" that outlined key technical areas in which
the United Nations and the Government might enhance
cooperation to address sexual violence in conflict. The
multifaceted response of the Colombian authorities to
sexual violence in conflict carries important lessons
for our global response. The key challenge in Colombia
remains implementation, and it is my intention to follow
up on Ms. Wallstrom's visit and to offer the technical
support of the United Nations, including the Team of
Experts, which have already conducted a follow-up
Visit. In the meantime, I urge the Colombian authorities
to ensure that sexual violence considerations are
explicitly reflected in the ongoing peace talks with the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.

I also intend to take up invitations by the authorities
in Syria, Mali and South Sudan to visit as soon as
possible. Conducting country Visits will continue to be
a key aspect of the mandate. Through such visits, we
can bear witness to the plight of survivors and carry
their voices to those in power. They are intended to open
space locally for dialogue and action on sexual Violence.
They serve as a means to engage parties to conflict to
make tangible protection commitments. They aim to
foster international cooperation on the implementation
of such mandates. The gravitas of the Council and the
mandate established by the Council to address sexual
Violence in conflict open doors at the highest levels. We
will continue to rely on the Security Council to support
such an engagement-based approach.

I was also delighted last week to participate in the
Group of Eight ministerial meeting in London, which
endorsed the historic declaration on the prevention of
sexual violence in conflict. The declaration represents
important political and financial support. It gives
us additional momentum at a crucial moment. The
impetus afforded by such support at the highest levels
of the international system is key to driving forward the
prevention and protection agenda on the ground.

We have an opportunity, unlike at any time in
history, to break the back of this age-old evil. We must
believe that sexual violence in conflict is not inevitable.
To eradicate it is not a "mission impossible", but will
require political leadership and political courage,
matched by bold protection initiatives on the ground.
It is our hope, therefore, that, on the basis of the
Secretary-General's report and his recommendations,
the Security Council will once again show its resolve
and unity of purpose and adopt in June a new
resolution on sexual violence in conflict - one focused
on accountability and prevention so as to further
consolidate and institutionalize the sexual violence
response in the context of the United Nations peace and
security architecture and Council mandates. May this
be a decisive moment - our moment to put an end to
the crime that is a blight on our collective humanity.

