Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement that will be made later
by the representative of the delegation of the European
Union.

The Netherlands would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his excellent report (S/2010/604)
and on its recommendations. We also wholeheartedly
co-sponsored resolution 1960 (2010), which was
introduced by the United States in its capacity as the
current President of the Security Council. We agree
with the emphasis on applying listing and de-listing
criteria with regard to parties to armed conflict. The
resolution provides concrete measures to define,
implement and monitor specific and time-bound
commitments - indispensable commitments, I would
like to add.

The Netherlands is committed to strengthening
the protection against and the prevention of conflict-
related sexual violations and violence. We provide
financial support to scenario-based training on sexual
violence for United Nations peacekeepers, which is
referred to both in the Secretary-General's report and
in the new resolution. We believe that operational
readiness with regard to sexual violence can increase
effectiveness in the overall protection of civilians.
In addition, the Netherlands supports a training
initiative on the protection of human rights and the
prevention of sexual violence with the Congolese
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo. That innovative project makes use of footage
from the award-winning documentary Weapon of War,
about the perpetrators of sexual violence.

In the context of the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) and of the third year of the Dutch national

action plan, the Dutch Ministries of Foreign Affairs and
Defence jointly produced a publication entitled The
Dutch Do's on Women, Peace and Security -
Diplomacy, Defence and Development in Partnership.
The publication describes the implementation of the
Dutch integrated approach towards women, peace and
security at the country level - for instance, by
supporting the political participation of women in
Afghanistan and by integrating gender training with
security-sector development in Burundi and sexual
violence issues in the Dutch support to the Congolese
security sector.

Finally, we are pleased to announce bilateral
collaboration between the Netherlands and Spain in the
development of more civilian and military gender
capacity so as to increase operational readiness. We
have a responsibility to arrive well prepared at our
respective missions, be they peacekeeping, military or
civilian. That commitment resulted from a recent
Spanish-Dutch seminar with troop-contributing
countries on the subject of gender in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. One conclusion of the seminar was that
sustainable peace and reconstruction could only be
achieved by involving local communities and by
supporting active roles for women.

That has implications for the way that United
Nations and other missions are planned, but also for
their composition. The Netherlands is committed to
supporting such a development through practical
contributions, such as training.

