Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to express our great satisfaction at
the manner in which you have presided over this
meeting, as well as for the final remarks you just made
and the accurate summation you gave of this meeting's
deliberations, a meeting we described as very
important at the very beginning of our first statement.

I should like to comment briefly on the statement
made by Ambassador Negroponte with regard to my
statement this morning, in which I took up the
suffering of Syrian and Palestinian women under
Israeli occupation. The entire world - and in
particular people who have suffered occupation - is
familiar with the suffering of women, especially under
occupation. We have always hoped that armed women
would not participate with the Israeli Defence Forces in
acts of repression against Arab women under
occupation. Nevertheless, I should like to stress that
there can be no comparison between an occupying
Power and a people languishing under occupation,
enduring occupation and fighting to rid itself of
occupation.

The entire world knows that Syria - for well-
known historical and geographic reasons and because
of the expulsion of large numbers of Palestinians -
has had to host many Palestinian refugees since 1948.
Those Palestinian refugees, like all other human beings
in the world, have the right to express their views, to
have their own aspirations and to return to the land
where they once lived but from which they were
expelled. I believe that is clearly stated in United
Nations resolutions. We in Syria have stressed, and we
now reiterate, that the groups in Syria are not armed.
There are information officers in Syria, not training
camps. There are camps of refugees who have been
uprooted from their land by Israel and whose return
Israel refuses to allow, as it refuses to comply with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

With regard to the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and the responsibility of States - in
particular Security Council members - you know full
well, Mr. President, as Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, that Syria was one of the first
countries to respond to that resolution. It is the duty of
Council members to defend international peace and
security. We believe that it is a fundamental
responsibility of those members - in particular the
permanent five - to ensure the implementation of
Council resolutions. No one denies that 28 resolutions
adopted by the Council concern one of the parties that I
mentioned in my statement: the aggressor party that
has refused to heed any of those 28 resolutions. In no
way can that aggressor be compared to the victim.

Furthermore, if they really want peace and
security to prevail in the Middle East region and truly
want a better life for all women in the Middle East, all
United Nations Member States, including Security
Council members and in particular permanent members
of the Council - and here, I would stress Ambassador
Negroponte's statement - have the duty not to provide
weapons of destruction to Israel, especially the
sophisticated weapons used by Israel to kill innocent
people, and they ought not to provide to Israel
hundreds of millions of dollars that are then used to
carry out occupation.

I do not believe, Mr. President, that I departed
from the agenda item.

