Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his presence at the opening
of this meeting, but also, and above all, for his
commitment to this great undertaking.

Just one set of figures enables us to measure the
scope of today's debate. During the First World War,
80 per cent of those who died in combat were men -
more specifically, soldiers and officers. In the conflicts
ravaging the world today, 80 per cent of victims are
civilians - more specifically, women and children.
That is just to give us some idea of the importance of
taking measures to remedy what is truly a scourge of
our time.

France fully associates itself with the statement to
be made shortly by the Danish presidency of the
European Union.

In a few days - on 31 October, to be exact - the
Council will adopt, at the initiative of the Council
President, a statement recalling that the Council
remains, more than ever, seized of the follow-up and
implementation of the provisions contained in
resolution 1325 (2000), adopted two years ago,
concerning women, peace and security. In that
presidential statement, the Council will focus on the
specific areas that require its attention and action. We
consider today's debate appropriate for considering and
defining together the guidelines for our action in the
coming months.

The attention that the Security Council gives to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict stems
wholly from its mandate in the area of peace and
security. Of course, like the issue of the protection of
children in armed conflict, the subject of women in
armed conflict must be taken up in a spirit of
cooperation among all the various bodies of the United
Nations, as well as in a spirit of imagination, synthesis
and consensus.
Resolution 1325 (2000) sets forth three basic
principles. The first is that women are not simply
victims of armed conflict; they are, and must be, full-
fledged actors in the process of resolving conflicts and
rebuilding after them. Secondly, women are involved in
the decisions and recommendations of the various
competent bodies of the United Nations. There must,
therefore, be more women in decision-making
positions. Lastly, strategies aimed at conflict-
prevention and strengthening peace must integrate the
gender perspective in order to take into account the
needs of women and to enable them to participate fully
in decision-making at every level.

Mr. Kofi Annan has invited us to take stock of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) two years
after its adoption. Let us say right away that, as he
forcefully pointed out in his report, much remains to be
done. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the 21 concrete and constructive actions he has
suggested. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
two points.

First, when we look at conflicts we often observe
that women's roles are still viewed, too often, as
essentially passive ones. We must instead emphasize
participation by women at every turn. Participation was
a key word in the Beijing Platform for Action. In a
word, participation means that women should be able
to act everywhere and under all circumstances. Women
are the ones in the best position to define their
priorities on the basis of their respective situations.

Much progress has to be made in ensuring
cooperation between the United Nations and actors on
the ground. The Council should promote that
cooperation by encouraging regular contacts between
United Nations organs, on the one hand, and women's
organizations and networks in the field, on the other.
That request is constantly made of us in fairly strong
terms, as we were reminded by the non-governmental
organizations in attendance at the Council meeting held
last week under the Arria formula on the initiative of
Ms. Christine Lee, who is here with us and whom I
would like to thank.

In that vein, allow me to cite two concrete
examples. In Afghanistan the United Nations
encouraged parties to the Bonn Agreement to include
women in their delegations. That was real progress. We
must move ahead in the same direction without letup.
My second example is from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. During the inter-Congolese dialogue held
in Sun City, South Africa, a few months ago, every
delegation included a significant number of
representatives from women's organizations. Again,
that trend must be continued and strengthened.

Peace cannot be built without the full and
determinant involvement of women. Rebuilding
societies emerging from armed conflicts and
establishing new democratic forms of Government
must be based on the active participation of women in
political as well as, more broadly, public life. In that
regard, I would like to suggest a few specific actions.

First of all, specific measures must be
implemented to include girl soldiers in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
The report of the Secretary-General correctly notes that
girl soldiers do not currently benefit from DDR
programmes. This is something of concern to me
personally, as last year I organized a meeting that
included girl soldiers. I was truly struck by what
amounts to the virtual martyrdom of girl soldiers. I
believe this is something we must follow very closely.

Secondly, I believe that information about women
and girls in armed conflict should be made available to
the Council Whenever we take up conflict situations
such as the one in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or any other conflict of concern, and not just
when we hold thematic debates such as today's.

I should now like to turn to the role of the United
Nations itself. The United Nations must serve as an
example. Having women participate in processes to re-
establish peace must also mean systematically having
women participate in every aspect of the Council's
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, I would like to
pay tribute to the commitment of Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno, who at every possible
occasion has been promoting the establishment of
gender-adviser posts in many United Nations missions.

In that regard, I have a concrete proposal to
make: why not therefore establish a gender adviser
within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations?
Doing so would make it possible systematically to
include the gender dimension in every one of the 15
peacekeeping missions currently deployed. It would
also make it possible to provide better training for the
personnel being sent into the field, as well as to define
operating standards and procedures in this area.

In that connection, I would also like to mention
an example of something that we in France welcomed.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees has
prepared a code of conduct to combat any possible
sexual abuse in refugee camps. That code should serve
as a basis for similar commitments required of all
personnel serving in peacekeeping operations.

France hopes that today's debate will be an
opportunity for the Council to continue to think about
how best to develop its strategies and recommendations
when it considers how best to avoid the impact of
armed conflict on women and how to strengthen
women's role in the rebuilding and strengthening of
peace. It is also the hope of France that the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) will in fact be implemented
in every mission established by the Council.

