Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates
the French initiative to hold, in advance of the
commemoration of the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict on 19 June,
an open debate on conflict-related sexual violence.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
information and for his introduction to the debate
today. We also thank all three briefers for their excellent
briefings on the subject.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's April report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361), as well
as his recommendations. As the report states, the reality
on the ground continues to be characterized by an
alarming number of incidents of mass rape, systematic
and widespread sexual violence, and impunity. The data
contained in the report, in particular that relating, inter
alia, to the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia, are nothing short
of deeply shocking and angering. By the way, a lot of
additional information on sexual abuse in the Central
African Republic was brought to my attention during my
own recent visit to the Central African Republic as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic.

Sexual violence continues on a strikingly high
level against the most vulnerable groups - children,
refugees, displaced persons and minorities. In 2015
alone, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, sexual
violence against children accounted for 41 per cent of
the reported cases of violence. Conflict-related sexual
violence has a devastating impact on societies that are
already traumatized by war, in particular on people's
lives, families and communities. In that regard, we
would like to stress again that sexual violence is a crime
under international law, under specific provisions of the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols and
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. It is a grave breach of the Geneva Conventions
when sexual violence is used as a method of warfare.
It is also important that, in a series of resolutions, the
Council has committed to breaking the taboo around
speaking up about wartime rape and to taking action
to put an end to its use and to shattering the culture
of impunity.

On 19 June, we will mark eight years since the
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), which condemned
sexual violence, which is used as a tactic of war and
constitutes a threat to global peace and security. Today,
in 2016, we are facing new disturbing realities. As our
Council stated in resolution 2242 (2015), acts of sexual
violence have become part of the strategic objectives
and ideology of certain terrorist groups and are being
used as a tactic of terrorism and as an instrument to
increase their power, with an impact on financing,
recruitment and the destruction of communities. The
aforementioned Secretary-General's report shows
that this outrageous trend has only increased. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Shabaab,
Boko Haram, Ansar Dine, the Taliban and Al-Qaida
continue to practice sexual enslavement, abductions,
forced marriages and forced pregnancies. They use
sexual violence as part of their system of punishment
and reward.

Particularly disturbing is a pattern, identified and
outlined in the Secretary-General's report, linking the
trafficking in persons, particularly women and girls, by
terrorists with sexual Violence. In situations of conflict,
extremist and terrorist groups use human trafficking
for sexual purposes to increase their power, revenue
and recruitment base. That is why we share the opinion
that it is essential to understand and counteract that
terrorist strategy of using sexual violence as a tactic
of terrorism.

During times of Violent conflict, rape is frequently
used to harm, humiliate and shame. All too often, the
stigma and shame associated with sexual violence
remains with the victim rather than the perpetrator.
Special attention should also be given to internally
displaced persons, the majority of whom are women
and children. Owing to the stigma and other factors,
those crimes remain significantly underreported. As
the Secretary-General states in his report, for each rape
reported in connection with conflict, 10 to 20 cases are
likely go undocumented. Many victims suffer in silence
while impunity for the perpetrators remains prevalent.
We must continue to speak out about the stigma so that it
moves firmly onto the shoulders of perpetrators and not
the survivors. We must speak and act to protect children
born out of rape. We should take actions to respond to
the needs of survivors across the legal, psychological,
social, medical and other vital spheres. We should build
justice and security systems that can respond to and
help prevent sexual violence and tackle impunity.

Sexual violence has been a feature of most
conflicts. However, only recently has the international
community started to openly discuss it in the discourse
of conflict prevention. Unfortunately, Ukraine has
also been affected by conflict as a result of Russian
aggression. Among other serious consequences, we
have seen an increase in sexual violence cases. In order
to address that problem, the Ukrainian authorities
are ready to enhance cooperation with the relevant
international organizations and mechanisms, first and
foremost, with the United Nations. We have noted that
the latest Secretary-General's report does not contain
any references to the conflict-related sexual violence
in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
of Ukraine under the control of the Russian-backed
separatists, and we strongly believe those omissions
should be corrected. We would therefore like to use
this opportunity to propose that the relevant special
procedures, such as Ms. Bangura's work, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, include the situation in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in her field
of activities.

Ukraine, as a country that recently adopted
a national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), strongly supports the need to
ensure the equal participation of women and their full
involvement in decision-making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution, and their active presence
within the justice and security sectors in positions such
as lawyers, judges, police officers and others. We are
also fully committed to contributing to the international
community's and the Council's concrete, practical and
effective preventive efforts and response to sexual
violence in conflicts.

